# Observability of Strapdown INS Alignment: A Global Perspective

**YUANXIN WU**

**HONGLIANG ZHANG**

**MEIPING WU**

**XIAOPING HU**

**DEWEN HU,** Senior Member, IEEE
National University of Defense Technology
People’s Republic of China


**Alignment of the strapdown inertial navigation system (INS)**
**has strong nonlinearity, even worse when maneuvers, e.g.,**
**tumbling techniques, are employed to improve the alignment.**
**There is no general rule to attack the observability of a nonlinear**
**system, so most previous works addressed the observability**
**of the corresponding linearized system by implicitly assuming**
**that the original nonlinear system and the linearized one have**
**identical observability characteristics. Strapdown INS alignment**
**is a nonlinear system that has its own characteristics. Using the**
**inherent properties of strapdown INS, e.g., the attitude evolution**
**on the SO(3) manifold, we start from the basic definition and**
**develop a global and constructive approach to investigate the**
**observability of strapdown INS static and tumbling alignment,**
**highlighting the effects of the attitude maneuver on observability.**
**We prove that strapdown INS alignment, considering the**
**unknown constant sensor biases, will be completely observable**
**if the strapdown INS is rotated successively about two different**
**axes and will be nearly observable for finite known unobservable**
**states (no more than two) if it is rotated about a single axis.**
**Observability from a global perspective provides us with insights**
**into and a clearer picture of the problem, shedding light on**
**previous theoretical results on strapdown INS alignment that were**
**not comprehensive or consistent.. The reporting of inconsistencies**
**calls for a review of all linearization-based observability studies in**
**the vast literature. Extensive simulations with constructed ideal**

**observers and an extended Kalman filter are carried out, and**
**the numerical results accord with the analysis. The conclusions**
**can also assist in designing the optimal tumbling strategy and the**
**appropriate state observer in practice to maximize the alignment**
**performance.**


Manuscript received December 25, 2008; revised March 25, 2010
and August 25, 2010; released for publication September 7, 2010.


IEEE Log No. T-AES/48/1/XXXXXX.


Refereeing of this contribution was handled by J. Morton.


This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (60604011), the Foundation for the Author of
National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of People’s Republic of
China (FANEDD 200897), Program for New Century Excellent
Talents in University (NCET), and the Cheung Kong Scholars
Program.


Authors’ address: Department of Automatic Control, College of
Mechatronics and Automation, National University of Defense
Technology, Changsha, Hunan, People’s Republic of China 410073,
E-mail: (yuanx ~~w~~ u@hotmail.com).


0018-9251/12/$26.00 c° 2012 IEEE



I. INTRODUCTION


The strapdown inertial navigation system (INS)
necessitates an alignment stage to determine the initial
condition before the navigation operation. Alignment
is vitally important, because the performance of an
INS is largely decided by the accuracy and rapidness
of the alignment process. We care most about the
initial body attitude during the alignment, because
other initial conditions such as position and velocity
are relatively easy to determine [1—3]. Attitude is
essentially an SO(3) manifold [1] [4—6], which inevitably
brings strong nonlinearity to the strapdown INS
system, as well as the alignment stage, and even
stronger nonlinearity when inertial sensor (gyroscope
and accelerometer) biases are considered or when
rotating or accelerating maneuvers are intentionally
introduced to improve the observability or estimability

[7—10].
Regardless of the technique (gyrocompassing,
state estimation, or observer) used to address the
alignment problem, observability analysis is necessary,
because it reveals the inherent estimability of the
system [11—13]. For an unobservable system, we
cannot achieve satisfactory estimation even if the
measurement is accurate enough. Unfortunately,
no formal criterion tells whether or not a nonlinear
dynamic system, such as alignment and other
strapdown INS-related problems, is observable [13],
so observability works so far have been largely
devoted to observability of the corresponding
linearized system (direct form) or the linear error
dynamic equation (indirect form) [7—10, 14—25]. For a
linear time-invariant system, the observability analysis
is straightforward: it tests the rank of the observability
matrix. In contrast, the linearization is generally an
implicit time-varying linear system, analysis of which
is cumbersome and involves the evaluation of the
observability Grammian [12]. If a linear time-varying
system could be well approximated by a piecewise
linear constant system and certain conditions on
the null space of the dynamic matrix were met for
each constant segment, the observability analysis
would be considerably simplified, obtaining the main
observability characteristics of the original system by
a rank test of concatenation of the constant segment
observability matrices [20], e.g., in transfer or in-flight
alignment [20, 23], so-called multiposition alignment

[7, 25], and simultaneous localization and mapping

[26]. A general linear time-varying model was used
in [9] to investigate the observability properties of
INS/GPS (Global Positioning System) by examining
the time derivatives of the system output.


1 In differential geometry, SO(3) is the abbreviation for the
special orthogonal matrix in three-dimensional space that has +1
determinant. The manifold can be simply seen as a linear space
satisfying nonlinear constraints; specifically, the SO(3) manifold
is a 3 £ 3 matrix that satisfies the orthogonal and unit-determinant
constraints.



IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012 1


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [1] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Regarding the observability analysis based on the
linearized system, we need to underline three weak
points:


1) Practitioners often find themselves lost in
nontrivial symbolic matrix rank testing, especially
for high-dimensional systems [8, 9, 25]. It is
extremely difficult to obtain analytical observability
conditions for general linear time-varying systems,
and practitioners must seek nonanalytical support from
numerical simulations [9].
2) Linearization implies that the observability
result can only locally characterize the properties
of the original nonlinear system [13, 27, 28]. That
is to say, the insights thus obtained are for the
corresponding linearized system, not for the nonlinear
system. Just as different curves might have the
same tangential line, different nonlinear systems
might have an identical linearized system, so the
observability result for the linearized system may
not be comprehensive for the original nonlinear
system [29].
3) Setting aside the linearization approximation,
validity of the observability analysis for the linearized
system is arguable. By definition, a system is
observable if the initial state can be determined
given the state transition and measurement models
of the system and outputs during some time interval

[12, pp. 153—158]. In other words, the state and
measurement matrices should be known. In [7—10]
and [14—25], however, state, measurement, or both
matrices of the linearized system are functions of the
unknown current state at which the nonlinear system
is linearized. It is the unknown state that is to be
determined by the estimation process.


In this paper, we revisit the observability of
strapdown INS alignment from a global perspective
in an effort to overcome the preceding weaknesses. In
particular, the statement that no general rule exists to
check the observability of a general nonlinear system
does not imply the impossibility of observability
analysis by exploiting the structure inherent in
special classes of systems [30]. Strapdown INS
alignment, as well as other strapdown INS-based
systems, is a kind of special-structure system, with
its attitude state evolving on the SO(3) manifold. In
earlier studies, we used the special SO(3) structure
to examine the observability of nonlinear INS and
odometer self-calibration [31, 32] and the INS/GPS
system [29], yielding new, comprehensive insights.
In this paper, we investigate the observability
property of the original nonlinear strapdown INS
alignment directly, starting from the basic definition
of observability. Throughout this paper, we use the
terms “global observability” to name the observability
analysis of the nonlinear system on a finite time
interval and “instantaneous observability” to name
the observability analysis in an infinitely small



neighborhood at the linearization point. [2] We know
that instantaneous observability deals with the ability
to distinguish the states from their neighbors in an
infinitely small time interval or instantaneously,
while global observability describes the ability to
estimate the states in the entire time span [28]. The
instantaneous observability concept is identical to that
of global observability for a linear system but different
for a nonlinear system. An instantaneously observable
system is globally observable, but a globally
observable system may be locally or instantaneously
unobservable [28]. In other words, the requirements
for global observability are looser than those for local
ones. As we demonstrate, the global observability
perspective is straightforward and constructive, leading
to insights into and comprehensive understanding
of tumbling effects on the nonlinear strapdown INS
alignment problem.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II
formulates and establishes strapdown INS alignment
as a problem of solving a set of infinite nonlinear
equations on a continuous time interval, in contrast to
that of matrix rank computation in linearization-based
observability analysis. Section III presents the result
of global observability in the form of constructive
theorems. Static and attitude-maneuvering cases
are both considered. Sufficient conditions to make
the alignment fully observable are analytically
derived, drawing a clear picture of the effect of
attitude maneuvers, i.e., inputs, on state observability.
Section IV carries out extensive numerical simulations
to aid understanding of the theoretical analysis.
Simulation results accord with what theorems tell us.

Conclusions are made in Section V.
The contribution of the paper is twofold. First,
a global-observability perspective is proposed to
investigate strapdown INS alignment, which provides
us with insights into the problem and unveils the
incompleteness and inconsistency of previous
linearization-based observability studies of the
problem. Specifically, the reporting of inconsistency
calls for a review of all linearization-based
observability studies in the vast literature. Second,
this paper, along with [29], [31], and [32], provides
a straightforward and efficient way to perform
observability analysis for other strapdown INS-based
systems.


II. PROBLEM STATEMENT OF ALIGNMENT AND

OBSERVABILITY


This section presents a mathematical formulation
of strapdown INS alignment based on which
observability analysis is to be performed in the sequel.
Here, we focus on the ground alignment at a known


2 The previous linearization-based observability analysis is an
approximation of instantaneous observability, but we show that it
is not a consistent approximation.



2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [2] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


location (longitude, latitude, and height are given).
For brevity, the nonlinear alignment system is directly
provided and the development details are readily
available in textbooks such as [1—3] and [33].
Without loss of generality, the local-level frame N
is selected as the reference frame (east, north, up). We
denote with B the INS body frame, with E the Earth
frame, and with I some chosen inertial frame. The
inertial sensor outputs are contaminated by random
constant biases. Using gyroscopes and accelerometers
outputs, the ground velocity **v** [n] = [v N v U v E ] [T] and
the body attitude matrix with respect to the reference
frame **C** [b] n [satisfy the kinematic equations as] [3]



the observability analysis is indispensable, because
it fundamentally reveals how to enhance the
potential alignment performance through tumbling
techniques.
This paper considers deterministic observability

[11—13], where random noises in system dynamics
and measurements are not considered, in contrast to
stochastic observability evaluated under uncertainty

[34—36]. A system is said to be observable if the
initial state could be derived from knowledge of the
system in finite time. In a more formal language, the
definition of observability is as follows [12]:
“A system is said to be (globally) observable
if for any unknown initial state **x** (0) there exists a
finite t 1 - 0 such that knowledge of the input and the
output over [0, t 1 ] suffices to determine uniquely the
initial state **x** (0). Otherwise, the system is said to be
(globally) unobservable.”
The ground velocity is observable, because **v** [n] (0) =
**0** . By substituting (4), the strapdown INS alignment
observability problem (SAOP) of interest is reduced to
the following:
Does it suffice to uniquely determine the initial
state by solving the infinite nonlinear equations over
the continuous time interval [0, t 1 ]


**C** _ nb [=] **[ C]** [n] b [(][!] nb [b] [£][),] ! nb [b] [=][ !] ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [¡] **[ C]** [b] n [!] ie [n] (5)


**C** [n] b [(] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [) +] **[ g]** [n] [ =] **[ 0]** (6)


_ _
**b** g = **0**, **b** a = **0** (7)


where the initial state includes the initial attitude
matrix **C** [b] n [(0), the gyroscope drift] **[ b]** g [and the]
accelerometer bias **b** a Unlike a linear system, whose
observability is irrelevant to the system input,
observability of a nonlinear system highly depends on
the system input [11, 13]. In this case, system input
refers to the body angular rate ! ib [b] [and the specific]
force **f** [b] . Equivalently, the SAOP investigates the effect
of the known body angular rate and specific force on
state observability. The required body angular rate and
specific force are fulfilled by attitude motion.


III. GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE OF OBSERVABILITY


This section shows how to attack the SAOP
from a global perspective by decoupling and solving
the nonlinear (5)—(7). If not explicitly stated, the
strapdown INS is not located at the Earth’s poles, i.e.,
L 6= §¼=2.
First, we present several lemmas, which are used
later.


L EMMA 1 [37, 38] _For any two linearly independent_
_vectors, if their coordinates in two arbitrary frames are_
_given, then the attitude matrix between the two frames_
_can be determined._


L EMMA 2 _Given_ m _known points_ **a** k _,_ k = 1,2, :::, m _, in_
_three-dimensional space satisfying_ j **a** k ¡ **x** j = r _, where_



and



**C** _ nb [=] **[ C]** [n] b [(][!] nb [b] [£][)]

(1)
! nb [b] [=][ !] ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [¡] **[ C]** [b] n [(][!] ie [n] [+][ !] en [n] [)]


_
**v** [n] = **C** [n] b [(] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [)][ ¡][ (2][!] ie [n] [+][ !] en [n] [)][ £] **[ v]** [n] [ +] **[ g]** [n] (2)



where ! nb [b] [is the body angular rate with respect to]
the reference frame, expressed in the body frame;
! ib [b] [is the error-contaminated body angular rate]
measured by gyroscopes in the body frame; ! ie [n] [=]

[− cos L − sin L 0] [T] is the Earth rotation rate in
the reference frame, with − being the Earth rate
and L being the local latitude; ! en [n] [= [][v] E [=][(][R] E [+][ h][)]
v E tan L=(R E + h) ¡ v N =(R N + h)] [T] is the angular
rate of the reference frame with respect to the Earth
frame, expressed in the reference frame; R E and
R N are, respectively, the transverse radius and the
meridian radius of curvature; h is the altitude; **f** [b] is
the error-contaminated specific force measured by
accelerometers in the body frame; **g** [n] = [0 ¡ g 0] [T]

is the gravity vector in the reference frame; and g
is the magnitude of local gravity. The 3 £ 3 skew
symmetrical matrix (¢£) is defined so that the cross
product satisfies **a** £ **b** = ( **a** £) **b** for arbitrary two
vectors. The gyroscope drift **b** g and the accelerometer
bias **b** a are taken into consideration approximately as
random constant vectors, i.e.,

_ _
**b** g = **0**, **b** a = **0** : (3)


Equations (1)—(3) form the augmented system
dynamic equation, with its state comprising the
body attitude matrix **C** [b] n [, the ground velocity] **[ v]** [n] [, the]
gyroscope drift **b** g, and the accelerometer bias **b** a .
Because the strapdown INS has zero ground velocity
during ground alignment (whether angular motion
exists or not), the measurement equation is


**y** = **v** [n] ´ **0** : (4)


The purpose of alignment is to estimate the state
of system (1)—(4) using some kind of observer or
estimation method. To attain accurate alignment,


3 If not explicitly stated, quantities in this paper are time dependent.
The dependence on t is omitted for clearer presentation.



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 3


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [3] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


**x** _is an unknown point,_ r _is a positive scalar, and_ j ¢ j
_is the norm operator. If points_ **a** k _do not lie in any_
_common plane,_ **x** _has a unique solution. See Appendix_
_Section A for the proof._


L EMMA 3 _Let_ **a** (t) _and_ **b** (t) _be known_
_three-dimensional vectors on some time interval that_

_satisfy_ **a** (t) £ **m** = **b** (t) _, where_ **m** _is an unknown constant_
_vector. If_ **a** (t) _has nonconstant directions, then_ **m** _can be_
_uniquely solved. See Appendix Section B for the proof._


L EMMA 4 _Let_ **a** _and_ **b** _be known three-dimensional_
_vectors satisfying_ **a** £ **m** = **b** _(_ j **a** j 6= 0 _), where_ **m** _is an_
_unknown vector. If_ j **m** j _is given, then_ **m** _has solutions_
_expressed as_ **m** = § **a** ~~p~~ j **a** j [2] j **m** j [2] ¡ j **b** j [2] =j **a** j [2] ¡ **a** £ **b** =j **a** j [2] _._

_See Appendix Section C for the proof._


A. Static Alignment


For most applications, the strapdown INS has to
align itself under a still condition, which is known as
static alignment. This kind of alignment has been most
frequently studied so far [1, 15, 16, 33].


T HEOREM 1 _For static alignment, the SAOP is_
_unobservable. The number of unobservable states is_
_infinite._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 During the static period, the
body angular rate ! ib [b] [and the specific force] **[ f]** [b] [ are]
constants and ! nb [b] [= 0. From (5), it gives]


! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [=] **[ C]** [b] n [!] ie [n] [:] (8)


Attitude transformation does not change the
magnitude of a vector, so we have


j! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [j][ =][ −] (9)


which means that the solution of **b** g can be any point
on the sphere surface with radius − that centers on
! ib [b] [. Because][ !] ib [b] [is constant, (9) imposes a constraint]
on **b** g that has three unknown components.
Similarly, taking norms on both sides of (6)
indicates
j **f** [b] ¡ **b** a j = g (10)


where g is the known magnitude of the local gravity.
It shows that the solution of **b** a can be any point
of the sphere surface with radius g that centers on
**f** [b] . Equation (10) imposes a constraint on the three
unknown components of **b** a .
The biases **b** g and **b** a are not independent.
Equations (6) and (8) imply


(! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [)] [T] [(] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [) =][ ¡][!] ie [nT] **[C]** [n] b **[C]** n [b] **[g]** [n] [ =][ g−] [sin] [L]


(11)
which imposes one more constraint on **b** g and **b** a .
Using (9) and (10), we see that (11) says the angle
formed by the two vectors ! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [and] **[ f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [is]
¼=2 ¡ L.



Fig. 1. Trajectory history of gravity vector in inertial frame
depicts cone.


Designate an inertial frame I to be the local-level
frame at t = 0, i.e., I = N(0). Decompose the body
attitude matrix at the current time as


**C** [b] n [=] **[ C]** [b] b [(] (0) [t][)] **[C]** n [b] (0) [(0)] **[C]** n [n][(0)] (t) [=] **[ C]** b [b] (0) [(][t][)] **[C]** n [b] [(0)] **[C]** [n] n [(0)] (t) (12)


where **C** b [b] (0) [(][t][)] [and] **[ C]** [n] n [(0)] (t) [are attitude matrices as functions]
of ! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [and][ !] ie [n] [, respectively. They encode,]
respectively, the attitude changes of the body frame
and the navigation frame from time 0 to t. Substituting
into (6) gives

**C** [b] n [(0)] **[C]** [n] n [(0)] (t) **[g]** [n] [ =] **[ C]** [b] b [(0)] (t) [(] **[b]** a [¡] **[ f]** [b] [)][:] (13)


The quantity **C** [n] n [(0)] (t) **[g]** [n] [ is the gravity vector seen]
from the inertial frame I, and its trajectory history
forms a cone at all locations but the two Earth poles
where the cone degenerates to a line, as shown in
Fig. 1. So there always exist two time instants that
**C** [n] n [(0)] (t) **[g]** [n] [ have linearly independent directions. Using]
Lemma 1, the initial body attitude **C** [b] n [(0) can be solved]
if only **b** g and **b** a are given.
Because **b** g and **b** a are not definite, **C** [b] n [(0) is]
indeterminate and has a solution for each feasible pair
of **b** g and **b** a . Therefore, the system is unobservable,
and the unobservable states are constrained by
(9)—(11) and (13).


R EMARK 1 Given **b** g and **b** a, the initial body matrix
**C** [b] n [(0) can be analytically solved. Right multiplying]
( **C** [n] n [(0)] (t) **[g]** [n] [)] [T] [ on both sides of and integrating over [0,] [t] 1 [],]
we have


t 1
**C** [b] n [(0)] **C** [n] n [(0)] (t) **[g]** [n] **[g]** [nT] **[C]** n [n] (0) [(][t][)] [dt]
Z 0


t 1
= **C** [b] b [(0)] (t) [(] **[b]** a [¡] **[ f]** [b] [)] **[g]** [nT] **[C]** n [n] (0) [(][t][)] [dt] (14)
Z 0


from which we solve


t 1
**C** [b] n [(0) =] **C** [b] b [(0)] (t) [(] **[b]** a [¡] **[ f]** [b] [)] **[g]** [nT] **[C]** n [n] (0) [(][t][)] [dt]
Z 0


t 1 ¡1
¢ **C** [n] n [(0)] (t) **[g]** [n] **[g]** [nT] **[C]** n [n] (0) [(][t][)] [dt] : (15)

        - Z 0 ¸



4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [4] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


R EMARK 2 Theorem 1 shows that we cannot
accomplish the state estimation during static
alignment. If a full-state estimator, e.g., the Kalman
filter, is designed to do the static alignment, the
estimator is supposed to converge to one of the
unobservable states depending on the estimator
settings, e.g., the selection of initial value (see Static
Alignment in Section IV).
In the linearization-based observability analysis,
the state space was usually divided into the observable
subspace and the unobservable subspace to achieve
better accuracy of estimation [15, 16]. This was
done by setting all but one unobservable state in the
observable combination to zeros. In the nonlinear
context given here, it is equivalent to imposing
constraints in addition to (9)—(11) and (13). For a
navigational strapdown INS, we may as well perform
the static alignment by simply assuming zero inertial
sensor biases. This is common sense for practitioners
(e.g., see [39]). The standard deviations of the [6]
neglected sensor biases impose a limit on the accuracy
to which the remaining states may be determined.
Theorem 1 can be generalized to portray the
problem of multiposition alignment.


T HEOREM 2 _Consider a strapdown INS over_ [0, t 1 ] _._
_If it is static on several disconnected subintervals such_
_that either_ ! ib [b] _[or]_ **[ f]** [b] _[ on these static segments does not]_
_lie in any common plane, then the system is observable._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 The determination of **b**
g
and **b** a can be achieved by using Lemma 2. Let
us first consider ! ib [b] [. As for (9), we know from]
Lemma 2 that **b** g has a unique solution if ! ib [b] [on]
these static segments does not lie in any common
plane. Consequently, the known ! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [does not lie]
in one plane as well. So **b** a is uniquely determined,
noting (11) can be rewritten as (! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [)] [T] **[b]** a [=]
(! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [)] [T] **[f]** [b] [ ¡][ g−] [sin] [L][. The same story goes if we]
start the discussion from **f** [b] . Once the correct **b**
g
and **b** a are found, the initial body matrix **C** [b] n [(0) is]
analytically solved.


R EMARK 3 For the multiposition alignment in [7],
it was claimed (Theorem 2 therein) that two still
positions with different heading angles result in
an observable system. We can readily show using
Theorem 2 and Lemma 2 that the constraints (9)—(11)
introduced by such two still positions are not enough
to guarantee unique solutions of the sensor biases. In
fact, Lemma 2 says that at least four still positions
are required. As shown later, the rotating motion
between still positions matters for observability.
As a counterexample, consider a rotating motion
that never stops or stops at an end position with the
same heading as the start position. Theorem 2 in

[7] says nothing about this, although the defect was
partly remedied by a later work [24] using Lyapunov
transformation and by our short note [25].



Theorem 2 employs only the information during
the disconnected stays and thus requests tight
conditions for an observable system. It is attitude
motion that brings the strapdown INS from one
static position to another. We next investigate attitude
motion’s contribution to observability.


B. Tumbling Alignment


The proper way to obtain accurate alignment is
to improve the observability by, e.g., maneuvering

[7—10, 14, 18, 24, 40, 41]. Observability has a tight
connection with the input for a nonlinear system

[11, 13]. As far as the SAOP is concerned, the
observability is affected by the input, i.e., the body
angular rate and specific force. Constant-speed
rotation is considered first and then extended to

varying-speed rotation.


T HEOREM 3 _Consider the system rotating with the_
_non-zero constant_ ! nb [b] [(][!] nb [b] [6][= 0] _[ and]_ [ _][!] nb [b] [= 0)] _[ over]_

[0, t 1 ] _. Suppose_ ! [_] ib [b] _[or]_ [ _] **[f]** [b] _[ has a nonconstant direction:]_


1) _If_ ! nb [b] _[is not perpendicular to both]_ **[ g]** [b] _[ and]_ [ !] ie [b] _[,]_
_the system is unobservable with two indistinguishable_

_states._
2) _If_ ! nb [b] _[is perpendicular to]_ **[ g]** [b] _[ but not to]_ [ !] ie [b] _[,]_
_the system is unobservable with two indistinguishable_
_states. In addition,_ **b** a _is observable._
3) _If_ ! nb [b] _[is perpendicular to]_ [ !] ie [b] _[but not to]_ **[ g]** [b] _[,]_
_the system is unobservable with two indistinguishable_
_states. In addition,_ **b** g _is observable._
4) _If_ ! nb [b] _[is perpendicular to both]_ **[ g]** [b] _[ and]_ [ !] ie [b] _[, the]_
_system is observable._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3 From (5), we have


! nb [b] [=][ !] ib [b] [¡][ b] g [¡] **[ C]** [b] n [!] ie [n] [:] (16)


Because ! nb [b] [is constant, taking the time derivative on]
both sides and substituting (5) and (7) gives


**0** = ! [_] ib [b] [+ (][!] nb [b] [£][)] **[C]** n [b] [!] ie [n] [:] (17)


With (16), the preceding equation is rewritten as


**0** = ! [_] ib [b] [+][ !] nb [b] [£][ (][!] ib [b] [¡][ b] g [)][:] (18)


Taking the time derivative again on both sides, we
obtain

_
! ib [b] [£][ !] nb [b] [= ¨][!] ib [b] [:] (19)


In addition, the time derivative of (6) yields


**C** [n] b [(][!] nb [b] [£][ (][f] [b] [ ¡][ b] a [) + _] **[f]** [b] [) =] **[ 0]** (20)


or, equivalently,


! nb [b] [£][ (][f] [b] [ ¡][ b] a [) + _] **[f]** [b] [ =] **[ 0]** [:] (21)


Taking the time derivative again, it gives


**f** _ b £ ! nbb [= ¨] **[f]** [b] [:] (22)




[6]


WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 5


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [5] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM




[6]




[6]




[6]




[6]




[6]




[6]




[6]


Because ! [_] ib [b] [or _] **[f]** [b] [ has a nonconstant direction as]
assumed, Lemma 3 tells us that ! nb [b] [can be uniquely]
determined from (19) or (22). Now ! nb [b] [can be used]
as a known quantity.
Rewrite (21) as


! nb [b] [£][ (] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [) =][ ¡] **[f]** [_] [b] [:] (23)


According to (10), j **f** [b] ¡ **b** a j = g. Using Lemma 4, the
solution of **b** a is


[6]


6




**[f]** [b] [j] [2]
j! nb [b] [j] [2] [ ¡ j] ¡ [!] nb [b] [£][ _] **[f]** [b]

j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]


[6]


6



j! nb [b] [j] [2] [:] (24)


[6]


6



! [b]
nb
**b** a+,¡ = **f** [b] §


[6]


6



~~q~~


[6]


6



g [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2] [ ¡ j] **[f]** [_] [b] [j] [2]


[6]


6



valid (see Appendix Section D for explanations), so
the system is unobservable with two indistinguishable
states. Specifically, if (! nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [)][ ¢][ (][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [)][ <][ 0, the]
feasible pairs should be ( **b** a+, **b** g+ ) and ( **b** a¡, **b** g¡ );
otherwise, the feasible pairs are ( **b** a+, **b** g¡ ) and
( **b** a¡, **b** g+ ).
2) ! nb [b] [is perpendicular to] **[ g]** [b] [ but not to][ !] ie [b] [.] **[ b]** a [has]
one solution, but **b** g has two solutions. There are two
feasible ( **b** a, **b** g ) pairs, so the system is unobservable
with two indistinguishable states.
3) ! nb [b] [is perpendicular to][ !] ie [b] [but not to] **[ g]** [b] [.] **[ b]** a [has]
two solutions and **b** g has one solution. We have two
feasible ( **b** a, **b** g ) pairs, and the system is unobservable
with two indistinguishable states.
4) ! nb [b] [is perpendicular to both] **[ g]** [b] [ and][ !] ie [b] [. Both] **[ b]** a
and **b** g have one solution, so the system is observable.


R EMARK 4 The precondition “ ! [_] ib [b] [or _] **[f]** [b] [ has a]
nonconstant direction” is not easy to check because
of derivative involvement. Equation (26) shows that_
! ib [b] [is perpendicular to][ !] nb [b] [. With (26) and (16), we]
have
j! [_] ib [b] [j] [2] [ =][ j][!] nb [b] [£][ !] ie [b] [j] [2] [:] (29)


Using (19), we obtain


_
! ib [b] [£][ ¨][!] ib [b] [= _][!] ib [b] [£][ ( _][!] ib [b] [£][ !] nb [b] [) =][ ¡j][!][ _] ib [b] [j] [2] [!] nb [b]


= ¡j! nb [b] [£][ !] ie [b] [j] [2] [!] nb [b] [:] (30)


That “ ! [_] ib [b] [has a nonconstant direction” ( _][!] ib [b] [£][ ¨][!] ib [b] [6][= 0)]
is identical to “! nb [b] [is unparallel to][ !] ie [b] [.” Similarly,]
(23) shows that **f** [_] [b] is perpendicular to ! nb [b] [. With (23)]
and (6), it yields


j **f** [_] [b] j [2] = j! nb [b] [£] **[ g]** [b] [j] [2] [:] (31)


With (22),


_ b b b b b
**f** £ ¨ **f** = _ **f** £ (_ **f** £ ! nb [) =][ ¡j] **[f]** [_] [b] [j] [2] [!] nb [b] [=][ ¡j][!] nb [b] [£] **[ g]** [b] [j] [2] [!] nb [b]


(32)

It shows that “ **f** [_] [b] has a nonconstant direction”
( **f** [_] [b] £ [¨] **f** [b] = 0) is identical to “6 ! nb [b] [is unparallel]
to **g** [b] .”
Theorem 3 makes moderate assumptions and
has a wide scope of applicability. Consider the case
in which ! [_] ib [b] [and _] **[f]** [b] [ have constant directions in the]
entire interval. In such a case, (30) and (32) show
that the three vectors ! nb [b] [,][ !] ie [b] [, and] **[ g]** [b] [ must be in the]
same direction. It refers to a strapdown INS system at
L = §¼=2 rotating with respect to the Earth along the
Earth’s axis. This case is extremely rare.


R EMARK 5 The indistinguishable states **b** g and **b** a
are separated from each other in the direction of ! nb [b] [.]
As shown by (25) and (28), **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ = 2! nb [b] [j][!] nb [b] [¢]
**g** [b] j=j! nb [b] [j] [2] [ and] **[ b]** g+ [¡] **[ b]** g¡ [= 2][!] nb [b] [j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j][=][j][!] nb [b] [j] [2] [, so]

wehave j **b** d a+ ¡ **b** a¡ j = 2gj cos(! [d] nb [b] [,] **[g]** [b] [)][j] [and] [j] **[b]** g+ [¡] **[ b]** g¡ [j][ =]

2−j cos(! nb [b] [,] [!] ie [b] [)][j][, where cos(][ b][¢][,] [¢][) denotes the cosine]



Substituting (23) and using (6), it is reduced to


**[g]** [b] [j]
**b** a+,¡ = **f** [b] § [!] nb [b] [j][!] nb [b] [¢] ¡ [!] nb [b] [£][ _] **[f]** [b]
j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]

= **b** a + [!] nb [b] [(][§][j][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [j][ ¡][ !] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [)] (25)
j! nb [b] [j] [2]


where **g** [b] = **C** [b] n **[g]** [n] [ =] **[ b]** a [¡] **[ f]** [b] [ according to (6) and “][¢][”]
denotes the dot product of vectors. When ! nb [b] [is]
perpendicular to **g** [b], **b** a+,¡ = **b** a and we have the
correct solution; otherwise, we get two distinctive
solutions, one of which is correct.
Rewrite (18) as


! nb [b] [£][ (][!] ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [¡][ !] nb [b] [) =][ ¡][!][ _] ib [b] [:] (26) [6]


According to (16), j! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [¡][ !] nb [b] [j][ =][ −][. With the help]
of Lemma 4, the solution of **b** g is given by


6




[6]


! [b]
nb ~~q~~
**b** g+,¡ = ! ib [b] [¡][ !] nb [b] [§]


6




[6]


j! nb [b] [j] [2]


6




[6]


− [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2] [ ¡ j][!][ _] ib [b] [j] [2]


6




[6]


¡ [!] nb [b] [£][ _][!] ib [b] : (27)
j! nb [b] [j] [2]


Substituting (26) and using (16), it yields

**b** g+,¡ = ! ib [b] [¡][ !] nb [b] [§] [!] nb [b] [j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j] ¡ [!] nb [b] [£][ _][!] ib [b] 6
j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]

= **b** g + [!] nb [b] [(][§][j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j][ +][ !] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [)] (28)
j! nb [b] [j] [2]


where ! ie [b] [=] **[ C]** n [b] [!] ie [n] [=][ !] ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [¡][ !] nb [b] [, according to (16).]
When ! nb [b] [is perpendicular to][ !] ie [b] [,] **[ b]** g+,¡ [=] **[ b]** g [and]
it gives the correct solution; otherwise, we get two
distinctive solutions, one of which is correct.
For each feasible ( **b** a, **b** g ) pair, the corresponding
solution of the initial attitude matrix **C** [b] n [(0) is given by]
(15). Therefore, the observability result depends on
the following:


1) ! nb [b] [is not perpendicular to both] **[ g]** [b] [ and][ !] ie [b] [.]
Both **b** a and **b** g have two solutions. We have four
possible ( **b** a, **b** g ) pairs, among which only two are




[6]


6


6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [6] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM




[6]


6




[6]


6




[6]


6




[6]


6




[6]


6




[6]


6




[6]


6


of the angle formed by two vectors. The distances
between the indistinguishable states of **b** g and **b** a
depend on the relation of ! nb [b] [with respect to] **[ g]** [b] [ and]
! ie [b] [, respectively.]


R EMARK 6 **g** [b] is in the vertical direction, and ! ie [b] [is]
parallel to the Earth axis. The following are natural
corollaries of Theorem 3: 1) If ! nb [b] [points in the local]
vertical direction, the system has two indistinguishable
states. In addition, **b** g is observable when the system
is located at the equator (L = 0). 2) If ! nb [b] [points]
in the north-south direction, the system has two
indistinguishable states. In addition, **b** a is observable.
3) If ! nb [b] [points in the east-west direction, the system]
is observable.

The following theorem shows that it is not the
static positions but the rotating motion between
that matters for observability. In other words,
static segments theoretically contribute nothing to
observability improvement.


T HEOREM 4 _Consider the system over_ [0, t 1 ] _. It rotates_
_with the non-zero constant_ ! nb [b] _[over the subinterval]_

[t 2, t 3 ] 2 [0, t 1 ] _and stays static for the other periods. If_

_
! ib [b] _[or]_ [ _] **[f]** [b] _[ has a nonconstant direction over]_ [ [][t] 2 [,] [t] 3 []] _[, then]_
_the claims are the same as in Theorem_ 3 _._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4 Because Theorem 3 is
directly applicable to the subinterval [t 2, t 3 ], the claim
will be proved if we can show that **b** g+,¡ and **b** a+,¡
satisfy (9)—(11) during the static periods. Without loss
of generality, we assume **b** g+ = **b** g (! nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [<][ 0) and]
**b** a+ = **b** a (! nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [ >][ 0).The correct biases] **[ b]** g+ [and] **[ b]** a+
naturally satisfy (9)—(11). Then we have


j! ib [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** g¡ [j] [2] [ =][ j][!] ib [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** g+ [+] **[ b]** g+ [¡] **[ b]** g¡ [j] [2]


= − [2] + 2(! ib [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** g+ [)] [T] [(] **[b]** g+ [¡] **[ b]** g¡ [)]


+ j **b** g+ ¡ **b** g¡ j [2] (33)


where ! ib [b] [(][t] s [) denotes the measured body angular rate]
when the system is in static condition at t s . From (8),
! ib [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** g+ [=][ !] ie [b] [(][t] s [). Substituting into (33), we get]
from Remark 5


j! ib [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** g¡ [j] [2]

= − [2] + 4 [(][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [(][t] s [))][j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j] + 4− [2] cos [2] (! nb [b] [d] [,] [!] ie [b] [)]
j! nb [b] [j] [2]

= − [2] + 4 [(][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [)][j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j] + 4− [2] cos [2] (! nb [b] [d] [,] [!] ie [b] [)]
j! nb [b] [j] [2]

! nb [b] [¢] = [!] ie [b] [<][0] − [2] ¡ 4 [j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j] [2] + 4− [2] cos [2] (! nb [b] [d] [,] [!] ie [b] [)]

j! nb [b] [j] [2]


= − [2] (34)


where the second equality is valid because the
physical vector ! nb is unchanged with respect to the



Earth, i.e.,


d d d
! nb [b] [(][t][),] [!] ie [b] [(][t] s [) =] ! nb [b] [(][t] 2 [),] [!] ie [b] [(][t] 2 [) =] ! nb [b] [(][t][),] [!] ie [b] [(][t][)]


for t s < t 2


d d d
! nb [b] [(][t][),] [!] ie [b] [(][t] s [) =] ! nb [b] [(][t] 3 [),] [!] ie [b] [(][t] 3 [) =] ! nb [b] [(][t][),] [!] ie [b] [(][t][)]


for t s                   - t 3 :

Similarly, we have


j **f** [b] (t s ) ¡ **b** a¡ j [2] = j **f** [b] (t s ) ¡ **b** a+ + **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ j [2]



(35)



= g [2] + 2( **f** [b] (t s ) ¡ **b** a+ ) [T] ( **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ )


+ j **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ j [2] (36)


where **f** [b] (t s ) is the measured specific force when
the system is static. From (6), **f** [b] (t s ) ¡ **b** a+ = ¡ **g** [b] (t s )
Substituting into (36), we obtain from Remark 5


j **f** [b] (t s ) ¡ **b** a¡ j [2]

= g [2] ¡ 4 [(][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [(][t] s [))][j][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [j] + 4g [2] cos [2] (! [d] nb [b] [,] **[g]** [b] [)]
j! nb [b] [j] [2]

= g [2] ¡ 4 [(][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [)][j][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [j] + 4g [2] cos [2] (! [d] nb [b] [,] **[g]** [b] [)]
j! nb [b] [j] [2]

! nb [b] = [¢] **[g]** [b] [>][0] g [2] ¡ 4 [j][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [j] [2] + 4g [2] cos [2] (! [d] nb [b] [,] **[g]** [b] [)]

j! nb [b] [j] [2]


= g [2] : (37)


As far as (11) is concerned, it yields


(! ib [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** g¡ [)] [T] [(] **[f]** [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** a¡ [)]

= (! ib [b] [(][t] s [)][ ¡] **[ b]** g+ [+] **[ b]** g+ [¡] **[ b]** g¡ [)] [T]


¢ ( **f** [b] (t s ) ¡ **b** a+ + **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ )


= g− sin L + ! ie [bT] [(][t] s [)(] **[b]** a+ [¡] **[ b]** a¡ [)]


¡ ( **b** g+ ¡ **b** g¡ ) [T] **g** [b] (t s ) + ( **b** g+ ¡ **b** g¡ ) [T] ( **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ )



= g− sin L+



2(! nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [(][t] s [))][j][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [j ¡][ 2(][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [(][t] s [))]
j! nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j][ + 4][j][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [jj][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j]
j! nb [b] [j] [2]



! nb [b] [¢][!] ie [b] [<][0,][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [>][0]
= g− sin L: (38)


R EMARK 7 For multiple static segments and rotating
segments interlaced, the proof of Theorem 4 indicates
that static segments contribute nothing to observability
enhancement because their immediate neighboring
rotating segments impose tighter constraints on the
state. The previous results in [7], [24], and [25]
contradict Theorem 4 and Remark 6 (see Table I for a
simple comparison). For example, it was claimed there
that if the strapdown INS is rotated around the vertical
direction for some time, the alignment becomes
observable and consequently globally observable (by
definition). As discussed in Remark 3 and confirmed



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 7


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [7] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


TABLE I

Simple Comparison with Linearization-Based Observability Result


Linearization-Based

Rotation Axis Global Observability Observability


Vertical Unobservable Observable [6]

North-South Unobservable Observable

East-West Observable Unobservable

6


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


in the next section, the previous claims in [7], [24],
and [25] are theoretically incorrect (the estimator
may converge to a wrong solution for some initial
value). The inconsistency of the linearization-based
observability result occurs because of the weak points
outlined in the Introduction.

Theorem 3 is constructive in that its proof not only
tells us whether the system is observable or not under
the assumptions but also gives us the explicit form of
analytical solutions to the observable or unobservable
states. Using the constructive proofs, we can design
an ideal observer to estimate the states. Here, the term
“ideal” is used because it requires the exact first and
second derivatives of gyroscope and accelerometer
outputs.
Consider that the strapdown INS rotates at the
non-zero constant ! nb [b] [over [][t] 2 [,] [t] 3 []. Rewrite (19) and]
(22) in a compact form as

_! ibb [£] ¨! ibb
**f** _ b £ ! nb [b] [=] ¨ **f** b, t 2 [t 2, t 3 ]: (39)
" # " #


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


#


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


#


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


! nb [b] [=]


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


¨! ibb
¨ **f** b
"


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


, t 2 [t 2, t 3 ]: (39)


[6]

6


6



varying-magnitude rotation. This has the practical
significance of eliminating the smooth requirement
of tumbling tables.


T HEOREM 5 _Consider the system rotating with the_
_non-zero, fixed-direction, varying-magnitude_ ! nb [b] [( _][!] nb [b] [6][=]
0 _and_ ! nb [b] [£][ _][!] nb [b] [= 0)] _[ over]_ [ [0,] [t] 1 []] _[. If]_ [ _] **[f]** [b] _[ is the non-zero]_
( **f** [_] [b] = 0)6 _, then the claims are the same as in Theorem_ 3 _._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5 As in the proof of Theorem
3, we obtain, using the time derivative of (6),


**f** _ b = ( **f** b ¡ **b** a ) £ ! nbb [:] (42)


Taking the time derivative of (42) gives


¨ **f** b = ( **f** b ¡ **b** a ) £ _! nbb [+ _] **[f]** [b] [ £][ !] nb [b] [:] (43)


Because ! nb [b] [is parallel to _][!] nb [b] [as assumed, (42)]
and (43) indicate that ! nb [b] [is normal to both _] **[f]** [b] [ and ¨] **[f]** [b] [.]
That is, ! nb [b] [can be expressed as]


! nb [b] [=][ k][(][t][)¨] **[f]** [b] [ £][ _] **[f]** [b] (44)


where k(t) is a scalar time function. Using (42)—(44),
we obtain


¨ b b b b
**f** £ _ **f** = (_ **f** £ ! nb [)][ £][ _] **[f]** [b] [ =][ j] **[f]** [_] [b] [j] [2] [!] nb [b] [=][ k][(][t][)][j] **[f]** [_] [b] [j] [2] [¨] **[f]** [b] [ £][ _] **[f]** [b]


(45)

from which we solve k(t) = 1=j **f** [_] [b] j [2], because j **f** [_] [b] j 6= 0.
So,
! nb [b] [= ¨] **[f]** [b] [ £][ _] **[f]** [b] [=][j] **[f]** [_] [b] [j] [2] (46)


is known. The remaining part of the proof is almost
the same as in Theorem 3 and thus has been omitted.


T HEOREM 6 _Consider the system over_ [0, t 1 ] _. It rotates_
_with the non-zero, fixed-direction, varying-magnitude_
! nb [b] [(][!] nb [b] [6][= 0] _[ and]_ [ !] nb [b] [£][ _][!] nb [b] [= 0)] _[ over the subinterval]_

[t 2, t 3 ] _and stays static for the other periods. If_ **f** [_] [b] _is the_
_non-zero_ ( **f** [_] [b] = 0)6 _over_ [t 2, t 3 ] _, then the claims are the_
_same as in Theorem_ 3 _._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6 See the proof of Theorem 4.
By assuming **f** [_] [b] = 0, Theorems 5 and 6 are6
inapplicable when ! nb [b] [is in the vertical direction (see]
(31) and Remark 5). Consider that the strapdown INS
rotates with the fixed-direction, varying-magnitude
! nb [b] [over [][t] 2 [,] [t] 3 []. We can construct a second ideal]
observer by the proof of Theorem 5, the ideal
observer for non-zero, fixed-direction,
varying-magnitude rotation (IO-NFVR)


1) To determine ! nb [b] [by (46).]
2) To obtain the possible solutions of gyroscope
and accelerometer biases by (24) and (27).
3) To obtain the initial body matrix by (15) for
each feasible ( **b** a, **b** g ) pair.


The following theorems prove that an observable
SAOP can always be attained by successive tumbling
around two or more different directions.




[6]

6


Left multiplying [ ! [_] ib [b] [£][ _] **[f]** [b] [£][] on both sides and]
integrating over [t 2, t 3 ] give

t 3

(( ! [_] ib [b] [£][)] [2] [ + (_] **[f]** [b] [£][)] [2] [)][dt][ ¢][ !] nb [b]

Z t 2

[6]

6


6




[6]

6


t 3 [6]
= [ ! [_] ib [b] [£][ ¨][!] ib [b] [+ _] **[f]** [b] [ £][ ¨] **[f]** [b] []][dt] (40)
Z t 2 6


6




[6]

6


[6]

6

from which we can solve


t 3 ¡1
! nb [b] [=] (( ! [_] ib [b] [£][)] [2] [ + (_] **[f]** [b] [£][)] [2] [)][dt]

       - Z t 2 ¸ 6


t 3
¢ [ ! [_] ib [b] [£][ ¨][!] ib [b] [+ _] **[f]** [b] [ £][ ¨] **[f]** [b] []][dt:] (41)
Z t 2


According to Lemma 3, the matrix inverse exists if

_
! ib [b] [or _] **[f]** [b] [ has a nonconstant direction over [][t] 2 [,] [t] 3 [].]
The ideal observer for non-zero constant rotation
(IO-NCR) are summarized here for clarity:


1) To determine ! nb [b] [by (41).]
2) To obtain the possible solutions of gyroscope
and accelerometer biases by (24) and (27).
3) To obtain the initial body matrix by (15) for
each feasible ( **b** a, **b** g ) pair.


The major assumption of Theorems 3 and
4 (fixed-direction, fix-magnitude rotation) can
be largely relaxed to allow for fixed-direction,




[6]

6


[6]

6


6


8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [8] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM




[6]

6


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


[6]

6


6




[6]

6


[6]

6


6


T HEOREM 7 _If there are no less than two subintervals_
_over_ [0, t 1 ] _on which_ ! nb [b] _[not only is a non-zero constant]_
_but also is linearly independent, then the system is_
_observable._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7 For each subinterval, ! nb [b] [is a]
non-zero constant, so we have from (18) and (21) that

! nb [b] [£] **[ b]** g [= _][!] ib [b] [+][ !] nb [b] [£][ !] ib [b]

(47)
! nb [b] [£] **[ b]** a [= _] **[f]** [b] [ +][ !] nb [b] [£] **[ f]** [b]


in which ! nb [b] [is a known quantity. Because][ !] nb [b] [on the]
subintervals is linearly independent as assumed, **b** g
and **b** a can be determined by (47). Consequently,
**C** [b] n [(0) is unique.]


T HEOREM 8 _If there are no less than two subintervals_
_over_ [0, t 1 ] _on which_ ! nb [b] _[not only has a non-zero,]_
_fixed-direction, varying-magnitude but also is linearly_
_independent, and additionally_ **f** [_] [b] = 06 _, then the system is_
_observable._


P ROOF OF T HEOREM 8 The proof is almost the same
as that for Theorem 7, except the first equation in (47)
is replaced with


! nb [b] [£] **[ b]** g [= _][!] ib [b] [+][ !] nb [b] [£][ !] ib [b] [¡][ _][!] nb [b] [:] (48)


R EMARK 8 Theorems 2, 7, and 8 give conditions
to obtain an observable system. Theorem 2 seems
to be of little use in that static segments contribute
nothing to observability, but it helps us when it comes
to numerical computation. To solve the unknown
state, Theorem 2 needs only the raw sensor outputs,
while Theorems 7 and 8 require their derivative
information, which magnifies the noises in practice.
The difference relates to the so-called observability
degree in some literature [7, 24]. The observability
degree lacks a solid analytical basis because of its
origin from numerical computation, but we find in our
later simulations that static segments do help suppress
the numerical errors.


IV. SIMULATION STUDY


This section is devoted to numerical verification of
analytical results, using extensive simulations with
the two ideal observers (IO-NCR and IO-NFVR)
and a practical approximate nonlinear observer
(extended Kalman filter, or EKF). The strapdown INS
(gyroscope drift of 0.01 deg/h, accelerometer bias of
50 ¹g, and output bandwidth of 100 Hz) is assumed
to be located at L = 28:2204 deg and h = 60 m. For
the apparent exhibition of observability changes,
the sensor noises are not added. Euler angles from
the reference frame to the body frame are defined
as first around the y-axis (yaw, Ã), followed by the
z-axis (pitch, μ) and then by the x-axis (roll, '). The
indirect form of EKF is used, and the linear error
dynamic equation for the system equations in (1)—(4)
is readily available in [1—3]. EKF has 12 states: 3



for angle error, 3 for velocity error, 3 for gyroscope
bias error, and 3 for accelerometer bias error. If not
explicitly stated, the following EKF settings are used:
The first 20 s are for coarse alignment, and random
error of 1 deg (1¾) is intentionally added to the coarse
alignment result. The initial sensor biases are zeros.


A. Static Alignment


The strapdown INS initial true attitude is set
to ' = 20 deg, Ã = 30 deg, and μ = 10 deg. The
alignment lasts for 300 s. In all simulations, EKF
converges to different estimates depending on the
initial attitude angle, as predicted in Remark 2.
Results for two runs of simulation are given for
demonstration. Figs. 2 and 3 present the estimated
attitude and sensor bias, respectively, for the
initial angle [19:896 deg 29:626 deg 9:620 deg] [T],

6 and Figs. 4 and 5 are for the other initial angle

[20:124 deg 31:123 deg 10:474 deg] [T] . The filter
converges quickly in both runs, but the two estimates
are quite different and there seems no connection
between them. In Fig. 6, we plot j! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [j][,][ j] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [j][,]
and (! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [)] [T] [(] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [) using the estimated sensor]
biases in the two runs, along with their analytical
values from (9)—(11). The constraints equations shown
in (9)—(11) clearly dictate how the unobservable
sensor biases behave in the estimation process. The
same goes for the attitude estimate, with (13) as the
constraint.

Because sensor biases are relatively small in
magnitude compared to gyroscope and accelerometer
outputs, (11) approximately leads to (! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [)] [T] **[f]** [b] [ ¼]
( **f** [b] ¡ **b** a ) [T] ! ib [b] [¼][ g−] [sin] [L][. This means that] **[ b]** g [lies on a]
circle, the intersection of the sphere surface j **b** g ¡ ! ib [b] [j]
and a cone, with ¡ **f** [b] being its rotation axis and the
half angle ¼=2 ¡ L; **b** a lies on a circle, the intersection
of the sphere surface j **b** a ¡ **f** [b] j and a cone, with ¡! ib [b]
being its rotation axis and the half angle ¼=2 ¡ L. The
vertexes of the two cones coincide with the centers of

the two spheres. The two intersecting circles are the
unobservable spaces of sensor biases. Fig. 7 illustrates
the unobservable spaces by plotting the bias estimates
of 1000 Monte Carlo EKF runs as dots in space (the
random error added to coarse alignment increases
to 5 deg, or 1¾, for better visual effect). In the left
graph, the gyroscope bias estimates apparently form
a segment of a circle on the sphere surface j **b** g ¡ ! ib [b] [j][;]
the accelerometer bias estimates in the right graph,
lying on the sphere surface j **b** a ¡ **f** [b] j, are too close to
be distinguished from one another.


B. Tumbling Alignment by Single-Axis Rotation


The strapdown INS initial true attitude angles
are set to zeros for clear demonstration. Rotations

along the three body axes are inspected in turn. The



6


WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 9


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [9] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM



6



6



6



6



6



6



6


Fig. 2. Attitude estimates for initial angle [19:896 deg 29:626 deg 9:620 deg] [T] .


Fig. 3. Sensor bias estimates for initial angle [19:896 deg 29:626 deg 9:620 deg] [T] .



body axes are now in the local north, up, and east
directions. As for EKF, the random error added to
coarse alignment deceases to 0:1 deg (1¾) to shorten
the transient stage.
1) _Up-Down Direction_ : The strapdown INS is
rotated along the up-down direction at 10 deg=s,
i.e., ! nb [b] [= [0,10 deg][=][s,0]] [T] [. The alignment lasts up]
to 600 s. The rotation starts at 100 s and ends at
500 s. IO-NCR is applied to the rotating segment,
and the bias estimates are given in Fig. 8 (zeros
for 0—100 s and 500—600 s mean that IO-NCR

cannot apply on them, not that the sensor biases
are zeros). The gyroscope and accelerometer biases
in the x-axis and the z-axis are unique and correct,
but in the y-axis, the direction of rotation, IO-NCR
gives the other (wrong) solution in addition to the



correct one: 14.2348 deg/h for gyroscope bias and
19:5839 m=s [2] for accelerometer bias. It can be readily
verified that the outcome is in accord with Remark
5, i.e., j **b** g+ ¡ **b** g¡ j = 2− sin L ¼ 14:2248 deg/h and
j **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ j = 2g ¼ 19:5834 m=s [2] .
Figs. 9 and 10 present EKF estimates of attitude
and sensor biases, respectively. All bias estimates
converge quickly to the correct values once the
rotation takes place, although the gyroscope bias
in the up direction needs more time to do so (see
Fig. 10, top graph). It indicates that the rotation
motion greatly affects observability. Fig. 11 “zooms
in” on the bias estimates, where we observe an
interesting phenomenon that exists in almost each
run. After the strapdown INS stops at 500 s, the
gyroscope estimates approach the true values faster,



10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [10] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 4. Attitude estimates for other initial angle [20:124 deg 31:123 deg 10:474 deg] [T] .


Fig. 5. Sensor bias estimates for other initial angle [20:124 deg 31:123 deg 10:474 deg] [T] .



whereas the accelerometer estimates depart from their
true values. As discussed in Remark 8, although the
static state does nothing to improve observability
(in addition to the rotating motion), it seemingly
helps mitigate numerical errors. The reason is
intuitive: it might be because various constraints have
different error-propagating characteristics. From the
viewpoint of global observability, the static segment
in 500—600 s reinforces the constraint equations
found in (9) and (10), of which (10) is used on
the rotating segment in 100—500 s, as explained
in the development of (23) and (24), but (9) is not
used. In addition, we examine the EKF response
by setting the initial value of accelerometer bias
to [0,18 m=s [2],0] [T] with other initial parameters
unchanged. In Figs. 12 and 13, EKF unsurprisingly



stabilizes at the unobservable state (the roll angle rests
at 180 deg).
Next, the strapdown INS rotates with the
varying-magnitude ! nb [b] [= [0,6 + 4sin(0][:][04][¼][(][t][ ¡]
100)) deg=s,0] [T] . IO-NFVR is applied to the
varying-magnitude rotation segment and yields the
same result as IO-NCR in Fig. 8. Figs. 14 and 15 plot
the EKF bias estimates for zero initial sensor biases
and for initial accelerometer bias [0,18 m=s [2],0] [T],
respectively. EKF in this case converges to the correct
or the wrong solution depending on the initial value.
Because the observers perform quite similarly for
constant and varying-magnitude rotations, we just
present the result of the former in the next subsection.
2) _North-South Direction_ : The strapdown
INS is rotated along the north-south direction at
! nb [b] [= [10 deg][=][s,0,0]] [T] [. The IO-NCR estimates of]



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 11


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [11] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 6. Computed values of j! ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [j][,][ j] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [j][, and (][!] ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g [)] [T] [(] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [) using estimated sensor biases in two sample runs, as]
compared to their analytical values from (9)—(11). Solid blue line is for first run, dotted blue line is for second run, and dashed red line
is for analysis.


Fig. 7. Sensor bias estimates of 1000 Monte Carlo runs. Left (in radians per second): gyroscope bias estimates (blue dots), sphere
surface j **b** g ¡ ! ib [b] [j][ (gray), and vector][ ¡] **[f]** [b] [ pointing outward (red). Right (in meters per second squared): accelerometer bias estimates]

(blue dots), sphere surface j **b** a ¡ **s** [b] j (gray), and vector ¡! ib [b] [pointing outward (red).]



sensor biases for 600 s are given in Fig. 16. The
accelerometer biases in three axes and the gyroscope
biases in the y-axis and the z-axis have only one
solution, but the gyroscope bias along the rotation
direction has two solutions: the correct one and

26.5164 deg/h. As revealed in Remark 5, in this case,
j **b** g+ ¡ **b** g¡ j = 2− cos L ¼ 26:5064 deg/h and j **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ j
= 0. Figs. 17 and 18 present the EKF estimates of
attitude and sensor biases, respectively, for 3600 s.
The rotation segment is 100—3500 s. The estimates
converge to the true value, although the sensor biases
in the x-axis and the pitch angle exhibit apparent
oscillation. EKF converges to the wrong solution for



the initial gyroscope bias [25 deg=h,0,0] [T], as shown
in Figs. 19 and 20, in which the accelerometer bias in
the x-axis needs more time to stabilize.

3) _East-West Direction_ : The strapdown INS
is rotated along the east-west direction with ! nb [b] [=]

[0,0,10 deg=s] [T] . The IO-NCR estimates of sensor
biases for 600 s are given in Fig. 21. We see that
the sensor biases have only one solution, because
the system is observable for this case. As in Remark
5, j **b** g+ ¡ **b** g¡ j = j **b** a+ ¡ **b** a¡ j = 0. The EKF estimates
of attitude and sensor biases for 7200 s are given
in Figs. 22 and 23, respectively. The rotating period
is 100—7000 s. The attitude shows severe jumps



12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [12] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 8. Bias estimates of IO-NCR for constant up-down rotation.


Fig. 9. Attitude estimates by EKF for constant up-down rotation.



as a result of Euler angles’ ambiguity and the
accelerometer bias in the z-axis converges to the true
value, with strong oscillating effects. The gyroscope
bias in the z-axis descends extremely slowly to
0.01 deg/h after 3000 s in Fig. 23. But we find later
that the convergence speed is considerably improved
for non-zero initial attitude (see Fig. 26, 100—700 s).


C. Tumbling Alignment by Multiple-Axis Rotation


We consider now the tumbling alignment by
rotating about multiple independent axes. The
strapdown INS true attitude is set to ' = 20 deg,
Ã = 30 deg, and μ = 10 deg, and the process lasts



2400 s. The random error added to coarse alignment
increases to 0.5 deg (1¾) for better demonstration. The
strapdown INS rotates first in the east-west direction
by ! nb [n] [= [0,0,3 deg][=][s]] [T] [ at 100—700 s, second in]
the north-south direction by ! nb [n] [= [3 deg][=][s,0,0]] [T]

at 800—1400 s, and finally in the vertical direction
by ! nb [n] [= [0,3 deg][=][s,0]] [T] [ at 1500—2100 s. For the]
remaining periods, the strapdown INS stays static.
Fig. 24 shows the history profile for ! nb [b] [over the]
three disconnected rotation segments, and Figs. 25
and 26 give the EKF estimates of attitude and
sensor biases, respectively. The estimates converge
satisfactorily to their true values. The second rotation



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 13


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [13] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 10. Sensor bias estimates by EKF for constant up-down rotation.


Fig. 11. “Zoom-in” view of EKF bias estimates.



starting at 800 s removes the remaining solution
ambiguity after the first rotation [4] and has a great
positive impact on reducing the bias estimate errors
and attitude errors, especially the accelerometer biases
in the y- and z-axes. The EKF computed standard
variances of bias estimates are plotted in Fig. 27.
Finally, we report an interesting phenomenon
about the wrong solution. The true initial angles are
set to zeros for easy demonstration. The strapdown
INS rotates first in the up-down direction by ! nb [n] [=]

[0,10 deg=s,0] [T] at 100—500 s and second in the
north-south direction by ! nb [n] [= [10 deg][=][s,0,0]] [T] [ at]


4 Thanks to one reviewer’s suggestions, it can be shown that an
added linear acceleration helps resolve the ambiguity. See Appendix
Section E for a brief discussion.



600—1000 s. The first rotation is the same as in the
single up-down rotation in subsection B. Figs. 28 and
29 present the EKF results when setting the initial
value of accelerometer bias to [0,18 m=s [2],0] [T] . EKF
stabilizes at the unobservable and wrong solution
during the first up-down rotation but is forced to
diverge from the wrong solution once the second
rotation starts. The second rotation eliminates the

solution ambiguity, and the wrong solution is
no longer a stabilizing state for EKF. This
phenomenon is a convincing support for the analysis
in Section III.


V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS


In this paper, we have revisited the strapdown INS
static and tumbling alignment from the perspective



14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [14] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 12. Attitude estimates by EKF (wrong convergence) for constant up-down rotation. Apparent jumps in top graph result from Euler
angles’ ambiguity.


Fig. 13. Sensor bias estimates by EKF (wrong convergence) for constant up-down rotation.



of global observability. The observability problem
is formulated as SAOP, i.e., whether it suffices to
determine the initial state by solving the infinite
nonlinear equations over the continuous time
interval. Equivalently, it investigates the effect of
the known body angular rate and specific force
on state observability. We prove that it is not the
static positions but the rotating motion that matters
for observability. Furthermore, SAOP will be
fully observable if the strapdown INS is rotated
successively about two axes. For cases of rotating
about a single axis, SAOP will be nearly observable
for no more than two unobservable states to which the

explicit solutions are analytically derived. The global
observability analysis is shown to be straightforward



and constructive and results in insights into and
a clearer picture of the strapdown INS alignment
problem. It sheds light on the incompleteness and
inconsistency of previous results. The paper also
throws doubts on and calls for a review of all

linearization-based observability studies in the vast
literature.

The theorems and claims in this paper are
supported by extensive simulations with constructed
ideal observers and an approximate nonlinear
observer (EKF). Although they make no observability
contribution in theory, EKF results show that static
segments do help mitigate numerical errors in the
rotating segments and static segments interlaced
simulations. Conclusions obtained can assist in



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 15


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [15] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 14. Sensor bias estimates by EKF for varying-magnitude up-down rotation.


Fig. 15. Sensor bias estimates by EKF (wrong convergence) for varying-magnitude up-down rotation.



optimal tumbling strategy and appropriate state
observer designs in practice to improve the alignment
performance. Before that, however, we have to
consider the lever arm between the table rotation
center and the strapdown INS origin, because presence
of the lever arm may remarkably decay the accuracy
of the zero velocity measurement and thus the
estimation performance. We are working on this in
the context of global observability.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT


Thanks to Ph.D. student Dayong Zhang for partial
simulation assistance. The authors acknowledge
Reviewer 2 for many detailed suggestions that
considerably improved the content and presentation
of early drafts of the paper.



APPENDIX


A. Proof of Lemma 2


The equality j **a** k ¡ **x** j = r means that **x** locates on
the surface of the sphere with radius r that centers on
**a** k, i.e.,


**a** [T] k **[a]** k [¡][ 2] **[a]** [T] k **[x]** [ +] **[ x]** [T] **[x]** [ =][ r] [2] [,] k = 1,2, :::, m: (49)


Without loss of generality, subtracting (49) for k =
1 from (49) for k = 2, :::, m yields, in the matrix
form,



( **a** 2 ¡ **a** 1 ) [T]


...


( **a** m ¡ **a** 1 ) [T]



3


**x** =
775



2

664



j **a** 2 j [2] ¡ j **a** 1 j [2]


...


j **a** m j [2] ¡ j **a** 1 j [2]



3

775 (50)



2



2

664



16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [16] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 16. Bias estimates of IO-NCR for constant north-south rotation.


Fig. 17. Attitude estimates of EKF for constant north-south rotation.



each row of which represents a plane in geometry.
Left multiplying [ **a** 2 ¡ **a** 1 ¢¢¢ **a** m ¡ **a** 1 ] on both sides, we
have



2



m
X( **a** k ¡ **a** 1 )( **a** k ¡ **a** 1 ) [T]
Ã k=2 !



x



in one plane, the unknown **x** can be determined.
Nonsingular **A** implies m ¸ 4, because any three
points are contained in some common plane.
For singular cases, we have further comments:


1) If rank( **A** ) = 2, i.e., **a** k lie in a common plane
(but not on a line), then the solution space of (50) is
of dimension 1. For any feasible **x**, the line **x** + ®³
also satisfies (50), in which ® is a real scalar and ³ is
the unit normal of the plane. Therefore, we may get
one or two solutions, depending on the relationship
between the line **x** + ®³ and the sphere surface, i.e.,
(49) for k = 1.



=



m
X( **a** k ¡ **a** 1 )(j **a** k j [2] ¡ j **a** 1 j [2] ): (51)


k=2



¢ m
If the matrix **A** = [P] k=2 [(] **[a]** k [¡] **[ a]** 1 [)(] **[a]** k [¡] **[ a]** 1 [)] [T] [ is]


nonsingular or, equivalently, points **a** k do not lie



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 17


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [17] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 18. Sensor bias estimates by EKF for constant north-south rotation.


Fig. 19. Attitude estimates of EKF (wrong solution) for constant north-south rotation. Apparent jumps in middle graph result from
Euler angles’ singularity.



2) If rank( **A** ) = 1, i.e., **a** k lie on a common
line–say, **l** –then the solution space is of dimension
2. The possible solutions lie on the intersection of
the sphere surface, i.e., (49) for k = 1, and the plane
normal to **l** .
3) If rank( **A** ) = 0, i.e., **a** k are equal to each other.
The solution space is the sphere surface (49) for
k = 1.


B. Proof of Lemma 3


Because **a** (t) has nonconstant directions in the
interval, there exist two time instants–say, t 1 and
t 2 –in the interval such that **a** (t 1 ) and **a** (t 2 ) have



**m** has a unique solution.


C. Proof of Lemma 4


Because

**a** £ **m** = **b** (53)



different directions. Then we have

**a** (t 1 )£ **b** (

**m** =

       - **a** (t )£ ¸       - **b** (



**a** (t 2 )£



**b** (t 1 )
**m** =
¸ - **b** (t )



**b** (t 2 )



: (52)
¸



Because



rank **a** (t 1 )£
μ· **a** (t 2 )£



= 3
¸¶



18 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [18] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 20. Sensor bias estimates by EKF (wrong solution) for constant north-south rotation.


Fig. 21. Bias estimates of IO-NCR for constant east-west rotation.



the unknown vector **m** lies in the plane containing
the vectors **a** and **a** £ **b** and can be expressed

as


**m** = ® **a** + ¯ **a** £ **b** (54)


where ® and ¯ are real numbers. Substituting into
(53), and considering **a** [T] **b** = 0,


¯ **a** £ ( **a** £ **b** ) = ¯( **a** [T] **ba** ¡ j **a** j [2] **b** ) = ¡¯j **a** j [2] **b** = **b** :


(55)



So ¯ = ¡1=j **a** j [2] . Taking the norm on both sides, (54)
gives


j **m** j [2] = ® [2] j **a** j [2] + ¯ [2] j **a** £ **b** j [2] = ® [2] j **a** j [2] + ¯ [2] j **a** j [2] j **b** j [2]


(56)


which yields ® = § ~~p~~ j **a** j [2] j **m** j [2] ¡ j **b** j [2] =j **a** j [2] . The solution

of **m** is



~~p~~
**m** = § **[a]**



j **m** j [2] ¡ j **b** j [2] ¡ **[a]** [ £] **[ b]**

j **a** j [2] j **a** j [2]



j **a** j [2] j **m** j [2] ¡ j **b** j [2]




[ £] **[ b]**

[=][ §] **[a]** [j] **[a]** [ ¢] **[ m]** [j]
j **a** j [2] j **a** j [2]



j **a** j [2] [:]




**[a]** [ ¢] **[ m]** [j] ¡ **[a]** [ £] **[ b]**

j **a** j [2] j **a** j [2]



(57)



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 19


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [19] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 22. Attitude estimates of EKF for constant east-west rotation. Apparent jumps result from Euler angles’ ambiguity.


Fig. 23. Sensor bias estimates by EKF for constant east-west rotation.



D. Why Are Only Two of Four Pairs Valid?


Check the angular relationship of ! ie [b] [and] **[ g]** [b] [,]
which is similar to (11). Substituting (25) and (28),


¡! ie [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [ = (][!] ib [b] [¡] **[ b]** g+,¡ [¡][ !] nb [b] [)][ ¢][ (] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a+,¡ [)]



= ¨ [!] nb [b] [j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [j] + [!] nb [b] [£][ _][!] ib [b]
μ j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]







!



¢



Ã



nb [j][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [j] nb [£][ _] **[f]** [b]
¨ [!] [b] + [!] [b]
j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]



j! nb [b] [j] [2]



= § [j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [jj][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [j] + [(][!] nb [b] [£][ _][!] ib [b] [)][ ¢][ (][!] nb [b] [£][ _] **[f]** [b] [)] :
j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [4]


(58)



For the third equality, “+” indicates **b** a and **b** g take the
same sign; otherwise, they take different signs. From
(23) and (26), ! nb [b] [is perpendicular to both _][!] ib [b] [and _] **[f]** [b]


and


¡! ie [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [ =][ §] [j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [jj][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [j] + !_ ib [b] [¢][ _] **[f]** [b]
j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]


= § [j][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [jj][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [j] ¡ [(][!] nb [b] [£] **[ g]** [b] [)][ ¢][ (][!] nb [b] [£][ !] ie [b] [)]
j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]


= § [j][(][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [)(][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [)][j] + [(][!] nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [)(][!] nb [b] [¢] **[g]** [b] [)]
j! nb [b] [j] [2] j! nb [b] [j] [2]


¡ ! ie [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] (59)



20 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [20] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 24. History profile of ! nb [b] [in multiple-axis tumbling alignment.]


Fig. 25. EKF attitude estimates for multiple-axis tumbling alignment.


Fig. 26. EKF sensor bias estimates for multiple-axis tumbling alignment.


WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 21


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [21] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 27. EKF computed standard variances of bias estimates in multiple-axis tumbling alignment.


Fig. 28. EKF attitude estimate for multiple-axis tumbling alignment (wrong solution phenomenon).



which means that the equality is valid only when it
takes “+” or “¡,” not both. If (! nb [b] [¢][ !] ie [b] [)(][!] nb [b] [¢] **[ g]** [b] [)][ <][ 0,]
it takes “+” and the ( **b** a, **b** g ) pairs with same signs
are feasible, i.e., ( **b** a+, **b** g+ ) and ( **b** a¡, **b** g¡ ); otherwise,
( **b** a+, **b** g¡ ) and ( **b** a¡, **b** g+ ) are feasible pairs.


E. Added Linear Acceleration Helps Resolve the
Ambiguity


Consider an added linear acceleration maneuver

after the first rotation. If the non-zero reference

velocity **v** [n] is available while accelerated, we have
from (2)


_
**v** [n] = **C** [n] b [(] **[f]** [b] [ ¡] **[ b]** a [)][ ¡][ (2][!] ie [n] [+][ !] en [n] [)][ £] **[ v]** [n] [ +] **[ g]** [n]


$ j **f** [b] ¡ **b** a j = j **v** [_] [n] + (2! ie [n] [+][ !] en [n] [)][ £] **[ v]** [n] [ ¡] **[ g]** [n] [j]



$ **f** [bT] **f** [b] ¡ 2 **f** [bT] **b** a + **b** [T] a **[b]** a


= j **v** [_] [n] + (2! ie [n] [+][ !] en [n] [)][ £] **[ v]** [n] [ ¡] **[ g]** [n] [j] [2][ ¢] [=] [½][:]


(60)
Taking the time derivative on both sides,

2 **f** [_] [bT] **b** a = 2 **f** [_] [bT] **f** [b] ¡ ½ [_] : (61)

Because we have from (23) **f** _ b, the accelerometer bias **b** ! a is obtained if _ nb [b] [£] **[ b]** a [=][ !] nb [b] **f** [£] b is **[ f]** [b] [ +]
not parallel to ! nb [b] [(Lemma 3). Consequently, the]
gyroscope bias ambiguity is removed.


REFERENCES


[1] Titterton, D. H. and Weston, J. L.
_Strapdown Inertial Navigation Technology_ (2nd ed.).
London: Institute of Electrical Engineers, 2004.



22 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [22] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


Fig. 29. EKF sensor bias estimates for multiple-axis tumbling alignment (wrong solution phenomenon).




[2] Farrell, J. A.
_Aided Navigation: GPS with High Rate Sensors._
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.

[3] Groves, P. D.
_Principles of GNSS, Inertial, and Multisensor Integrated_
_Navigation Systems._
Boston; London: Artech House, 2008.

[4] Shuster, M. D.
A survey of attitude representations.
_Journal of the Astronautical Science_, **41** (1993), 439—517.

[5] Kuipers, J.
_Quaternions and Rotation Sequences._
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998.

[6] Wu, Y., Hu, D., Wu, M., Hu, X., and Wu, T.
Observability analysis of rotation estimation by fusing
inertial and line-based visual information: A revisit.

_Automatica_, **46** (2006), 1809—1812.

[7] Lee, J. G., Park, C. G., and Park, G. W.
Multiposition alignment of strapdown inertial navigation

system.
_IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems_,
**29** (1993), 1323—1328.

[8] Rhee, I., Abdel-Hafez, M. F., and Speyer, J. L.
Observability of an integrated GPS/INS during

maneuvers.

_IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems_,
**40** (2004), 526—535.

[9] Hong, S., Lee, M. H., Chun, H-H., Kwon, S-H., and Speyer,
J. L.

Observability of error states in GPS/INS integration.
_IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology_, **54** (2005),
731—743.

[10] Porat, B. and Bar-Itzhack, I. Y.
Effect of acceleration switching during INS in-flight
alignment.
_Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics_, **4** (1981),
385—389.

[11] Isidori, A.
_Nonlinear Control Systems_ (2nd ed.).
Berlin; New York: Springer Verlag, 1989.

[12] Chen, C-T.
_Linear System Theory and Design_ (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.




[13] Sontag, E. D.
_Mathematical Control Theory_ (2nd ed.).
New York: Springer, 1998.


[14] Bar-Itzhack, I. Y. and Porat, B.
Azimuth observability enhancement during inertial
navigation system in-flight alignment.
_Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics_, **3** (1980),
337—344.


[15] Bar-Itzhack, I. Y. and Bermant, N.
Control theoretic approach to inertial navigation systems.
_Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics_, **11** (1988),
237—245.


[16] Jiang, Y. F. and Lin, Y. P.
Error estimation of INS ground alignment through
observability analysis.
_IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems_,
**28** (1992), 92—97.


[17] Bar-Itzhack, I. Y.
Minimal order time sharing filters for INS in-flight
alignment.
_Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics_, **5** (1982),
396—402.


[18] Bar-Itzhack, I. Y., Serfaty, D., and Vitekt, Y.
Doppler-aided low-accuracy strapdown inertial navigation

system.
_Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics_, **5** (1982),
236—242.


[19] Park, J. G., Lee, J. G., Kim, J., and Park, C. G.
Observability analysis of SDINS/GPS in-flight alignment.
In _Proceedings of the 13th International Technical Meeting_
_of the Satellite Division of the Institute of Navigation_, Salt
Lake City, UT, 2000.


[20] Goshen-Meskin, D. and Bar-Itzhack, I. Y.
Observability analysis of piece-wise constant
systems–Part I: Theory.
_IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems_, **2**
(1992), 1056—1067.


[21] Goshen-Meskin, D. and Bar-Itzhack, I. Y.
Observability analysis of piece-wise constant
systems–Part II: Application to inertial navigation
in-flight alignment.
_IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems_,
**28** (1992), 1068—1075.



WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 23


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [23] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


[22] Dambeck, J. H.
Observability and controllability analysis for a strapdown
inertial navigation system.
In _3rd International Workshop on High Precision_
_Navigation_, University of Stuttgart, Bonn, Germany, 1995.

[23] Park, J. G., Lee, J. G., and Park, C. G.
SDINS/GPS in-flight alignment using GPS carrier phase

rate.

_GPS Solutions_, **8** (2004), 74—81.

[24] Chung, D., Park, C. G., and Lee, J. G.
Observability analysis of strapdown inertial navigation
system using Lyapunov transformation.
In _35th Conference on Decision and Control_, Kobe, Japan,
1996.

[25] Wu, Y., Tang, Y., and Zhang, H.
Comments and further results on “Observability of an
integrated GPS/INS during maneuvers.”
_IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems_,
**46** (2010), 1566—1568.

[26] Bryson, M. and Sukkarieh, S.
Observability analysis and active control for airborne
SLAM.

_IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems_,
**44** (2008), 261—280.

[27] Terrell, W. J.
Local observability of nonlinear differential-algebraic
equations (DAEs) from the linearization along a
trajectory.
_IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control_, **46** (2001),
1947—1950.

[28] Hermann, R. and Krener, A. J.
Nonlinear controllability and observability.
_IEEE Transaction on Automatic Control_, **22** (1977),

728—740.

[29] Tang, Y. Wu, Y. Wu, M., and Hu, X.
INS/GPS integration: Nonlinear observability analysis.
_IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology_, **58** (2009),
1129—1142.

[30] Casti, J. L.
Recent development and future perspectives in nonlinear

systems.
_SIAM Review_, **24** (1982), 301—331.

[31] Wu, Y., Goodall, C., and El-sheimy, N.
Self-calibration for IMU/odometer land navigation:
Simulation and test results.

In _Institute of Navigation International Technical Meeting_,
San Diego, CA, 2010.




[32] Wu, Y., Wu, M. Hu, X., and Hu, D.
Self-calibration for land navigation using inertial sensors
and odometer: Observability analysis.
In _AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference_,
Chicago, IL, 2009.

[33] Britting, K. R.
_Inertial Navigation Systems Analysis._
New York: Wiley-Interscience: John Wiley & Sons, 1971.

[34] Ugrinovskii, V. A.
Observability of linear stochastic uncertain systems.
_IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control_, **48** (2003),
2264—2269.

[35] Boguslavskij, I. A.
_Filtering and Control._
New York: Optimization Software, Publication Division,
1988.

[36] Baram, Y. and Kailath, T.
Estimability and regulability of linear systems.
_IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control_, **33** (1988),
1116—1121.

[37] Black, H. D.
A passive system for determining the attitude of a
satellite.

_AIAA Journal_, **2** (1964), 1350—1351.

[38] Shuster, M. D. and Oh, S. D.

Three-axis attitude determination from vector

observations.

_Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics_, **4** (1981),
70—77.

[39] Wu, M., Wu, Y., Hu, X., and Hu, D.
Optimization-based alignment for inertial navigation
systems: Theory and algorithm.
_Aerospace Science and Technology_, **15** (2011), 1—17.

[40] Widnall, W. S. and Grundy, P. A.
Inertial navigation system tests having improved
observability of error sources.
_Journal of Aircraft_, **13** (1976) 12—21.

[41] Rogers, R. M.
_Applied Mathematics in Integrated Navigation Systems_ (3rd
ed.).
Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 2007.



**Yuanxin Wu** was born in Jinan, People’s Republic of China, in 1976. He
received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in navigation from the Department of
Automatic Control, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha,
People’s Republic of China, in 1998 and 2005, respectively.
From 2005 to 2007, he was with the National University of Defense
Technology as a Lecturer; he is now an associate professor with the same
university. From February 2009 to February 2010, he was a visiting Post Doctor
Fellow in the Department of Geomatics Engineering, University of Calgary,
Canada. His current research interests include inertial navigation systems,
inertial-based integrated navigation systems, and state estimation theory.
Dr. Wu was the recipient of 2008 Top 100 National Excellent Doctoral
Dissertations in China and 2010 New Century Excellent Talents in University in
China.


24 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 48, NO. 1 JANUARY 2012


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [24] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


**Hongliang Zhang** was born in Jiangsu, People’s Republic of China, in 1981.
He received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in automatic control from the National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, People’s Republic of China, in
2004 and 2010, respectively.
He is now with the National University of Defense Technology as a lecturer.
His current research interests include inertial navigation and integrated navigation.


**Meiping Wu** was born in Fujian, People’s Republic of China, in 1971. He
received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in aviation mechanics and the Ph.D. degree
in navigation, guidance, and control from the Department of Automatic Control,
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, People’s Republic of
China, in 1993, 1996, and 2000, respectively.
Currently, he is with the National University of Defense Technology as a
Professor and Dean of Education of the College of Mechatronics and Automation.
He is an expert of the 863 High Technology Project. His scientific interests
include aircraft navigation, guidance, and control.


**Xiaoping Hu** was born in Sichuan, People’s Republic of China, in 1960. He
received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in automatic control systems and aerocraft
designing from the Department of Automatic Control, National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha, People’s Republic of China, in 1982 and 1985,
respectively.
Currently, he is with the National University of Defense Technology as a
professor and is the Dean of the College of Mechatronics and Automation. His
scientific interests include inertial and satellite navigation, aerocraft guidance, and
control.


**Dewen Hu** (M’03–SM’06) was born in Hunan, China, in 1963. He received the
B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1983
and 1986, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha, China, in 1999, all in automatic control.
Since 1986, he has been at the National University of Defense Technology,
where he became a professor in 1996. From October 1995 to October 1996, he
was a visiting scholar at the University of Sheffield, United Kingdom. He has
authored or coauthored three monographs and more than 200 papers published in
international journals and conference proceedings. His research interests include
cognitive science, signal processing, system identification and control, and neural
networks. He is an action editor of _Neural Networks._
Dr. Hu is the joint recipient of more than a dozen academic prizes for his
research on neuroscience, neurocontrol, and signal processing.


WU, ET AL.: OBSERVABILITY OF STRAPDOWN INS ALIGNMENT: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 25


Mt2 job no. 2158 ieee aerospace and electronic systems 2158D02 [25] (XXX) 08-30-11 03:37 PM


