- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <

## A Comparison of Three Measurement Models for the Wheel-mounted MEMS IMU-based Dead Reckoning System


Yibin Wu, Xiaoji Niu and Jian Kuang






1






_**Abstract**_ **—A self-contained autonomous dead reckoning (DR)**
**system is desired to complement the Global Navigation Satellite**
**System (GNSS) for land vehicles, for which odometer-aided**
**inertial navigation system (ODO/INS) is a classical solution. In**
**this study, we use a wheel-mounted MEMS IMU (Wheel-IMU) to**
**substitute the odometer, and further, investigate three types of**
**measurement models, including the velocity measurement,**
**displacement increment measurement, and contact point**
**zero-velocity measurement, in the Wheel-IMU based DR system.**
**The measurement produced by the Wheel-IMU along with the**
**non-holonomic constraint (NHC) are fused with INS through an**

**error-state extended Kalman filter (EKF). Theoretical discussion**

**and field tests illustrate the feasibility and equivalence of the**
**three measurements in terms of the overall DR performance. The**
**maximum horizontal position drifts are all less than 2% of the**
**total travelled distance. Additionally, the displacement increment**

**measurement model is less sensitive to the lever arm error**

**between the Wheel-IMU and the wheel center.**


_**Index**_ _**Terms**_ **—Wheel-mounted** **IMU,** **dead** **reckoning,**
**odometer-aided INS, zero-velocity updates, vehicular navigation.**


N OMENCLATURE


a) Matrices are denoted in uppercase bold letters.
b) Vectors are denoted in lowercase bold italic letters.
c) Scalars are denoted in lowercase italic letters.
d) Coordinate frames involved in the vector transformation are

denoted as superscript and subscript. For vectors, the
superscript denotes the projected coordinate system.
e)  [ˆ] denotes the estimated or computed values.
f)  denotes the observed or measured values.
g) _**a**_ denotes the element of vector _x_ _**a**_ on the _**x**_ axis.


I. I NTRODUCTION
# T HE Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) has been commonly used for vehicular navigation since its very

birth. Although it can provide accurate positioning service in
line of sight conditions [1], the stability and reliability


 This work was funded by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China (No. 2016YFB0501800 and No. 2016YFB0502202).

The authors are with the GNSS Research Center, Wuhan University,
[Wuhan, China. {ybwu, xjniu, kuang}@whu.edu.cn.](mailto:kuang%7d@whu.edu.cn)



deteriorate in complicated environments such as urban
canyons and forests owing to the multipath and signal
blockage [2, 3]. Therefore, other relative positioning systems
are required to complement the GNSS to maintain the
accuracy during GNSS outages.

When considering a self-contained autonomous navigation
system which is immune to the disturbance from surroundings,
it is not reasonable to rely on the exteroceptive sensors, e.g.,
camera and light detection and ranging (LiDAR) [4-8]. These
visual navigation systems base on the perception of the
external environments which suffer from the illumination

variation, high motion blur, extreme weather conditions and

etc.


The inertial navigation system (INS) is an old but widely
used technology to determine the attitude and position for land
vehicles. With the explosive development of
microelectromechanical system (MEMS) techniques, MEMS
inertial measurement units (IMUs) have been extensively
applied for vehicular navigation owing to their low cost, small
size, light weight and low power consumption [9].
Nonetheless, the positioning error of INS drifts quickly with
time because of the significant inherent noise and bias
instability, especially for low-end sensors. In consequence,
other sensors are needed to limit the error accumulation of

INS.


The odometer-aided INS (ODO/INS), using either velocity
or travelled distance as measurement, has been exhaustively
studied for decades [10]. Particularly, a land vehicle cannot
move in the directions perpendicular to the forward direction
in the vehicle frame in general [11]. This is known as the
non-holonomic constraints (NHC). It was proven that
odometer and NHC contribute significantly to restrain the
error drift and enhance the INS stability [12, 13]. Zhao _et al_

[14] proposed an adaptive two-stage Kalman filter to solve the
problem that the changes of the odometer scale factor error and
the process noise degrades the filtering performance. Wu _et al_

[10, 15] analyzed the global observability for the
self-calibration of ODO/INS integrated system and
implemented the self-calibration procedure with the aid of
GPS. Authors in [16] applied the state transformation extended
Kalman filter in the INS/OD system and addressed the

 covariance-inconsistency loosely-coupled mode and tightly-coupled mode for ODO/INS problem. A comparison of

was presented in [17], where the travelled distance is used as


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



2



observation. Authors in [18] used odometer distance
measurement to integrate with INS in degraded GPS
environments. An INS/laser Doppler velocimeter (LDV)
integrated navigation algorithm was proposed in [19], in which
the distance increment errors over a given time interval were
treated as measurements to fully exploit the NHCs and LDV
information per cycle. Ouyang _et al_ [20] analyzed the error
characteristics of the odometer pulses and investigated three
measurement models in the ODO/INS integrated system,
including pulse accumulation, pulse increment, and pulse
velocity measurement. Field experiments showed that the
standard pulse velocity measurement yields the best
positioning accuracy.

However, the reliability of the odometer data depends on the
road conditions and vehicle maneuvers. It is also challenging
to fuse information from different systems because of
hardware modification and data transfer synchronization
problems [21].

In addition to installing external odometer or accessing the
onboard wheel encoder of the vehicle, the wheel velocity can
be obtained by mounting the IMU to the vehicle wheel. Let
one axis of the IMU be parallel to the rotation axis, the wheel
velocity can thereby be calculated using the gyroscope outputs
of that axis and the wheel radius. Moreover, rotating the IMU
around an axis with a constant speed can cancel the constant
sensor bias errors to some extent, namely, the rotation
modulation [9, 22, 23].

In our previous study [24], a wheel-mounted MEMS IMU
(Wheel-IMU)-based dead reckoning (DR) system called
Wheel-INS is proposed. In Wheel-INS, the IMU is placed on
the non-steering wheel of the vehicle. Then the vehicle
forward velocity computed by the gyroscope outputs and
wheel radius is treated as an external observation with NHC to

fuse with the strapdown INS. Experimental results have
illustrated that the positioning and heading accuracy of
Wheel-INS have been respectively improved by 23% and 15%
against ODO/INS. Furthermore, Wheel-INS exhibits
significant resilience to the gyroscope bias comparing with
ODO/INS.


Besides the wheel velocity, the Wheel-IMU can produce the
displacement increment measurement by integrating the
vehicle velocity and attitude; this observation would be more
accurate and stable than the traveled distance in the vehicle

frame produced by the odometer, because the vehicle attitude
is used to project the vehicle displacement to the navigation
frame at every IMU data epoch (usually at 200 Hz), shown as
Fig. 3. That is to say, the displacement measurement would be
more reliable compared to the distance measurement used in
ODO/INS, especially when the vehicle is turning.

In particular, the Wheel-IMU can be used to determine the
contact point between the wheel and ground. Similar to the
NHC, it is true that the velocity of the contact point on the
wheel is zero if the vehicle does not slide on the ground or
jump off the ground. Hence, the zero-velocity measurement
can be employed [25]. The observation model is deduced in
Section III-C. Zero velocity update (ZUPT) has been widely
used as external observation to suppress the error drift of INS



for pedestrian dead reckoning [26] and vehicular navigation

[12, 27].

In conclusion, based on our previous study [24], this paper
investigates and compares three kinds of measurement models
in Wheel-INS.


1) Velocity measurement: the wheel velocity calculated by

the wheel radius and the gyroscope readings of the
Wheel-IMU.

2) Displacement increment measurement: the displacement

increment of the vehicle in a certain period of time,
calculated by integrating the vehicle velocity and attitude
within the time frame.

3) Contact point zero-velocity measurement: the velocity of

the contact point on the wheel with respect to the ground
equaling to zero in general.


(a) System structure of the velocity measurement-based Wheel-INS [24].


(b) System structure of the displacement increment measurement-based
Wheel-INS.


(c) System structure of the contact point zero-velocity measurement-based
Wheel-INS.


Fig. 1 Overview of the structures of the three measurement models-based
Wheel-INS. _**ω**_ and _**f**_ are the angular rate and specific force measured by
the Wheel-IMU, respectively; “PVA” indicates the position, velocity, and
attitude of the IMU;  indicates the vehicle heading ;  indicates the roll
angle of the Wheel-IMU.


Fig. 1 depicts the algorithm flows of the three different
measurement models-based Wheel-INS. The system is
implemented using a 21 dimensional error-state extended
Kalman filter (EKF). Details of the state model and


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



3



observation models are presented in Section II–B and Section
III, respectively. The state corrections estimated by the EKF
are fed back to update the vehicle state and compensate the
IMU outputs.

The remaining content is organized as follows. Section II
gives the preliminaries of Wheel-INS, including the
installation of the Wheel-IMU, the definition of the
misalignment errors, and the error state model of the EKF.
Section III deduces the three types of measurements and
discusses their characteristic from the perspective of
observation model. Experimental results are presented and
analyzed in Section IV. Section V discusses the characteristics
of the three measurement models. Section VI provides some
conclusions and directions for future work.


II. P REREQUISITES


Unlike the conventional ODO/INS system whereby the
IMU is placed on the vehicle body, in Wheel-INS, the IMU is
mounted on the wheel of the vehicle. In this section, the

installation scheme of the Wheel-IMU and the coordinate

systems are defined and analyzed firstly. Then we provide a
review of the dynamic model of the error state adopted in the
EKF to lay the foundation of Wheel-INS.


_A._ _Installation of the Wheel-IMU_


To make the DR system indicate the vehicle state intuitively
without being affected by vehicle maneuvers, the IMU is
placed on a non-steering wheel of the vehicle. Fig. 2 illustrates
the installation of the Wheel-IMU and the definition of the

coordinate systems.


Fig. 2 Definition of the axes directions for the vehicle frame ( _v_ -frame), wheel
frame ( _w_ -frame), and IMU body frame ( _b_ -frame). The position and attitude
misalignment errors between the _b_ -frame and the _w_ -frame are also depicted

[24] .


The _v_ -frame denotes the vehicle coordinate system, with the
_x_ -axis pointing to the advancement direction of the host
vehicle, _y_ -axis pointing right, _z_ -axis pointing down, i.e.,
forward-right-down system. The _w_ -frame denotes the wheel
coordinate system. Its origin is at the rotation center of the
wheel. Its _x_ -axis points to the right of the vehicle, and its _y_ - and
_z_ -axes are parallel to the wheel surface to complete a
right-handed orthogonal frame. The _b_ -frame denotes the IMU



coordinate system, in which the accelerations and angular rates
generated by the strapdown accelerometers and gyroscopes are
resolved [28]. The _b_ -frame axes are the same as the IMU’s
body axes. The _x_ -axis is aligned with the wheel rotation axis,
pointing to the right of the vehicle. Therefore, given a stable
axle structure, the heading difference between the Wheel-IMU
and the vehicle can be approximated as fixed (equaling to 90  ),
i.e.,


 _bn_  _vn_   / 2 (1)


where  _bn_ and  _vn_ denote the IMU heading and vehicle
heading, respectively. _n_ indicates the _n_ -frame, which is a
local-level frame with origin coinciding with the _b_ -frame,
_x_ -axis directs at the geodetic north, _y_ -axis east, and _z_ -axis
downward vertically, namely, the north-east-down system.

As shown in Fig. 2, it is inevitable that the _b_ -frame is
misaligned with the _w_ -frame. Both the position (i.e., lever arm)
and attitude misalignment errors (i.e., mounting angles) have
been defined and analyzed in our previous study [24]. It is
emphasized that these errors must be compensated in advance
to obtain more robust and accurate state estimates. The lever

arm can be measured or estimated online by augmenting it into
the state vector, whereas the mounting angles can be calibrated
by purpose-designed algorithm. Refer to [29] for details of the
calibration procedure and error analysis.

The transformation from the _b_ -frame to the _n_ -frame can be

written as



_v_
where **C** indicates the DCM from the _n_ _n_ -frame to the _v_ -frame;

_n_
 _v_ indicates the heading angle of the vehicle. As the vehicle is
assumed to move on the horizontal surface, its pitch and roll
angles are zero. With the transformation matrices presented
above, all the transformation matrices between these four



_n_

_b_



 c  c  c s   s s  c s s   c s  c 
  c s  c c   s s s   s c   c s s 
  s  s c  c c  



c c  c s  s s c s s  c s c

c s  c c   s s s   s c   c s s


 s  s c c c



 c  c s   s s  c s s   c s  c

 c c   s s s   s c   c s s 


 s  s c  c c 



**C** _bn_  c s  c c   s s s   s c   c s s  (2)



where **C** _b_ indicates the direction cosine matrix (DCM) from _n_
the _b_ -frame to the _n_ -frame; c and s indicate “cos” and “sin”,
respectively; , , and  indicate the roll, pitch, and
heading angle of the IMU, respectively. The transformation
from the _b_ -frame to the _w_ -frame can be written as



_w_
_b_



 cos  cos   sin  sin  cos 
 
 cos  sin  cos  sin  sin  
  sin  0 cos  



cos  cos   sin  sin  cos

cos  sin  cos  sin  sin


 sin  0 cos 



 cos   sin  sin  cos 

 sin  cos  sin  sin 


sin  0 cos 



**C** _bw_ cos  sin  cos  sin  sin  (3)



where **C** _bw_ indicates the DCM from the _b_ -frame to the
_w_ -frame;  and  indicate the pitch and heading
mounting angles of the Wheel-IMU with respect to the wheel
frame, respectively. As the Wheel-IMU rotates with the wheel,
the roll heading angle is not considered. Assume that the
vehicle is moving on a horizontal plane and the mounting
angles of the Wheel-IMU have been compensated, the
transformation from the _n_ -frame to the _v_ -frame can be written

as



 cos  _vn_  sin  _vn_ 0 
  _vn_ cos  _vn_ 0 
 0 0 1 



_vn_  sin  _vn_



cos  _vn_  sin  _vn_ 0
= sin   _vn_ cos  _vn_ 0

 0 0 1



 _v_  

 _vn_ cos  _v_



_vn_ = sin  _vn_ cos  _vn_



**C** _vn_ = sin  _vn_ cos  _vn_ 0 (4)


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



4



coordinates systems can be consequently determined.

Assuming the misalignment error has been calibrated and
compensated, with the rotation of the wheel, the constant error
of the gyroscope measurements in the two axes parallel to the
wheel plane would be modulated into sine waves. After a
period of integration, the accumulated heading error caused by
the constant gyroscope bias error is canceled. [24] gives a
heuristic explanation of the rotation modulation effect. Details
can be found in [9, 30].


_B._ _Error State Model_


In this study, the conventional strapdown INS is leveraged
to predict the IMU state. The kinematic equations of INS are
described at length in the literature [12, 23, 31]; thus, we do
not go into details here. Additionally, we adopt the 21
dimensional error-state EKF to fuse the measurements with

INS in Wheel-INS.


A large amount of state estimators for nonlinear systems
have been proposed and applied to real world applications.
Wheel-INS is a local DR system without the awareness of
absolute heading and localization. Benefit from the rotation
modulation, the heading drift of Wheel-INS is rather slow.
Additionally, it can be observed from Eq. (6)-(8) that the state
model in Wheel-INS is linear and quite simple. By deriving
the error-state dynamics via perturbation of the nonlinear plant,
the error-state EKF lends itself to optimal estimation of the
error states [32, 33]. Therefore, those sophisticated state
estimators like unscented Kalman filter (UKF) [34], particle
filter (PF) [35], and strong tracking Kalman filter (STKF) [36,
37] would only limitedly improve the performance but
increase computational cost instead. For the sake of simplicity
and efficiency, we use the error-state EKF to implement the
information fusion and state estimation in Wheel-INS.

Moreover, we have proved in our latest paper [24] that the
21-state exhibits a better performance in Wheel-INS.

In this study, the state vector is constructed in the _n_ -frame,
including three dimensional position errors, three dimensional
velocity errors, attitude errors, residual bias and scale factor
errors of the gyroscope and accelerometer. It can be written as
#### x  t =    r n  T   v n  T  T  b g T  b a T  s g T  s a T  T (5)


where  _**r**_ _n_,  _**v**_, and _n_  are the INS indicated position,

velocity, and attitude errors, respectively;  _**b**_ _g_ and  _**b**_ _a_ are
the residual bias errors of the gyroscope and the accelerometer,
respectively;  _**s**_ and _g_  _**s**_ are the residual scale factor errors _a_
of the gyroscope and accelerometer, respectively. Because of
the errors from the sensors, IMU initial state, and other sources,
the navigation parameters calculated by the INS
mechanization equations contain errors. Several models have
been developed to describe the time-dependent behavior of
these errors [12]; the Phi-angle model is applied here, which
can be expressed as



and accelerometer, respectively, which can be expressed as

 _**ω**_ _ibb_  _**b**_ _g_  _diag_ ( _**ω**_ _ibb_ ) _**s**_ _g_ and  _**f**_ _b_  _**b**_ _a_  _diag_ ( _**f**_ _b_ ) _**s**_ _a_ ;
_diag_ ( ) is the diagonal matrix form of a vector;  _**g**_ is the _n_
local gravity error in the _n_ -frame. The sensor errors must be
modeled to be augmented into the state vector. In this study,
we chose the first-order Gauss-Markov process [38, 39] to
model the residual sensor errors. The continuous-time model

and discrete-time model are written as


1



 _x_ 



_x_  _x_  _w_
_T_

_x_ _k_  1  _e_  _t_ _k_  1 / _T_ _x_ _k_  _w_ _k_



(9)



1  _e_  _t_ _k_  1 /



_k_  1  _e_  _t_ _k_  1 / _T_ _x_ _k_  _w_ _k_



 _e_ _x_ 



where _x_ is the random variable; _T_ is the correlation time of
the process; _k_ is the discrete time index; and _w_ is the driving
white noise. The continuous-time dynamic model and
Jacobian matrix of the EKF can be found in [24].


III. M EASUREMENT M ODELS


In this section, the three different types of measurement
models based on the Wheel-IMU are deduced. As discussed in

Section-II-A, the misalignment errors of the Wheel-IMU can
cause significant observation errors; they have to be calibrated
previously for better performance. Here we assume that the
lever arm is measured and the mounting angles are
compensated in advance. Firstly, the vehicle forward velocity
measurement produced by the gyroscope outputs and wheel
radius is derived. Then, the displacement increment
measurement using the vehicle heading to project the traveled
distance in the _v_ -frame to the _n_ -frame is developed. Lastly,
details of the construction of the contact point zero-velocity
measurement is presented.


_A._ _Velocity Measurement_


The wheel velocity indicated by the Wheel-IMU can be
written as



_wheelv_   _x_ _r_  _e_ _v_  (  _x_   _x_ ) _r_  _e_ _v_



(10)



 _r_  _e_  (   



  _r_  _e_    _r_ 



_v_   _r_  _e_    _r_  _e_



_wheelv_  _r_  _x_  _e_ _v_







 _v_  _r_ 



_v_  _r_  _e_



where



_v_ _wheelv_ and



_n_ T _n_ T T T T T T T



where _v_ _wheelv_ and _v_ _wheelv_ indicate the observed and true wheel

speed, respectively;  _x_ is the gyroscope output in the x-axis;



_n_ _n_
####  t =    r    v 



where



 _**r**_ _n_,



  **C** _bn_   _ibb_ (6)


 _**v**_ _n_  **C** _bn_  _**f**_ _b_  **C** _bn_ _**f**_ _b_   (7)


 _**r**_ _n_   _**v**_ _n_ (8)


_b_ _b_

where  _**ω**_ _ib_ and  _**f**_ are the error vectors of the gyroscope



 _x_ is the true value of the angular rate in the _x_ -axis of the IMU;

 _x_ is the gyroscope measurement error; _r_ is the wheel
radius, and _e_ _v_ is the observation noise, modeled as the white

Gaussian noise.


The motion of the wheeled robots is generally governed by
two non-holonomic constraints [10, 40], which refers to the
fact that the velocity of the robot in the plane perpendicular to
the forward direction in the _v_ -frame is almost zero [11, 12]. By
integrating with the NHC, the 3 dimensional velocity
observation in the _v_ -frame can be expressed as

_v_ _v_ T
_**v**_ _wheel_ =  _v_ _wheel_ 0 0  _**e**_ _v_ (11)


Because the Wheel-IMU rotates with the wheel, the roll
angle with respect to the wheel changes periodically. That is to
say, it cannot be determined whether the vehicle is moving
uphill or downhill by the Wheel-IMU alone. Therefore, we
have to assume that the vehicle is moving on the horizontal
plane. Nonetheless, experimental results in [24] have shown


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



5



that it would not cause significant error if there are some
degrees of slope in the road. According to Eq. (1), the Euler
angles of the vehicle can be represented as



 _vn_   0 
  _vn_    0 
 _vn_   _bn_   / 2 



_n_

_v_



0

0



 _vn_  0
 _vn_    0
 _vn_   _bn_  



_n_ _n_
_v_   _v_



_n_ _n_

 _v_   _v_  0 (12)



velocity at every IMU sampling moment. As opposed to the
forward traveled distance in the _v_ -frame indicated by the
odometer [41], we exploit the displacement increment in the
_n_ -frame as observation, as shown in Fig. 3. The vehicle
displacement increment in the _n_ -frame is obtained by
projecting the wheel velocity to the _n_ -frame using the vehicle
heading in the integral process. Because the odometer cannot
perceive the change of the vehicle heading, the displacement
increment model would more accurate and reliable than the

forward distance, especially when vehicle is turning. In
addition, the integral can mitigate the high-frequency noise of
inertial sensor output to some extent.

According to Eq. (10) and Eq. (11), the velocity
measurement in the _n_ -frame ca be written as



_n_ _n_
_v_  _b_



/ 2



where , , and  are the roll, pitch, and heading angle of
the vehicle, respectively.

By performing the perturbation analysis, the INS-indicated
velocity in the _v_ -frame can be written as



_**v**_ ˆ _wheelv_  **C** ˆ _vn_ _**v**_ ˆ _IMUn_  **C C** ˆ ˆ _vn_ _bn_  ˆ _nbb_  _**l**_ _wheelb_



_**v**_ _v_  **C** _v_ _**v**_ _n_  **C C** _v_ _n_   _**l**_



**C** _v_ _**v**_ _n_  **C C** _v_



ˆ _b_

 _nb_ 
####  



 _**v**_   






####  I       v IMUn   v n 



_vn_ **I**     _**v**_ _IMUn_   _**v**_ _n_



**C** _v_ **I**



  _**v**_ _n_  







   _**v**_ 



_**v**_  _**v**_


####  I      I     C bn   nbb   ibb  



_vn_  **I**      **I**     **C** _bn_  _nbb_   _ibb_  _**l**_ _wheelb_



_wheeln_  **C** ˆ _vn_ _**v**_ _wheelv_  _**e**_ _v_



**C**



_**v**_  _**v**_  _**e**_



  **I**   **C** _n_  



  **I**    **C** _bn_  _nb_  



_**l**_



**C** _v_ **I**    **I**   **C**



 _n_       _b_  _nb_   _ib_ 


_v_ _v_ _n_ _v_ _n_ _b_ _b_
####  v wheel  C n  v  C n   C b   nb   l wheel    C vn   v IMUn    C bn   nbb   l wheelb   



The vehicle also has to be assumed to move on the horizontal

surface here. Similar to Eq. (13), the INS-indicated velocity in
the _n_ -frame can be represented as



 



_vn_ _**v**_ _wheelv_  **C** _vn_ _**v**_ _wheelv_    _**e**_ _v_



_**v**_ _wheel_  _v_ _**v**_ _wheel_    _**e**_


####  C vn v wheelv 



(15)



 _**v**_  _**v**_  



_wheelv_  **C** _vn_  _**v**_ _n_  **C** _vn_ **C** _bn_  _nbb_  _**l**_ _wheelb_



_**v**_ _v_  **C** _v_  _**v**_ _n_  **C** _v_ **C** _n_   _**l**_







_n_ _b_ _b_
####  C b   nb   l wheel 



(13)



**C** _n_ _**v**_ _v_  **C** _n_



**C** _v_  _**v**_ _n_  **C** _v_ **C** _n_



 _nb_  _**l**_ _wheel_  



_n_ _n_ _b_ _b_
####  v IMU    C b   nb   l wheel 



_vn_ _**v**_ _IMUn_  **C** _bn_  _nbb_  _**l**_ _wheelb_



_**v**_ _n_  **C** _n_   _**l**_







**C** _v_ _**v**_ _n_  **C**



 _nb_  _wheel_  



_vn_ _bn_ _**l**_ _wheelb_    _ibb_



ˆ _n_ ˆ _n_ ˆ _n_ ˆ _b_ ˆ _b_

_**v**_  _**v**_  **C**   _**l**_



ˆ _n_ ˆ _n_ _n_ ˆ _b_ _b_

_wheel_  _**v**_ _IMU_  **C** _b_  _nb_  _**l**_ _wheel_



 _**v**_   



**C**







**C C** _v_



_b_
####  l wheel  



_**l**_











  



ˆ _b_

 _nb_ 
####  



ˆ _[v]_ _b_
where _**v**_ _wheel_ is the wheel velocity estimated by INS; _**ω**_ _nb_ is the

angular rate vector of the _b_ -frame with respect to the _n_ -frame
projected to the _b_ -frame; _**v**_ ˆ _IMU_ _[n]_ is the INS-indicated IMU



where _**v**_ ˆ _[v]_



_**v**_ _wheel_ _[v]_ is the wheel velocity estimated by INS;



_**v**_ _n_   _**v**_ _n_  **C** _n_   _**l**_



_n_ _n_ _n_ ˆ _b_ _b_
_wheel_   _**v**_  **C** _b_  _nb_  _**l**_ _wheel_







_n_ ˆ _b_ _b_
####  C b   nb   l wheel 



**C** _n_



 _nb_  _**l**_ _wheel_  



ˆ



 _**v**_  _**v**_    



(16)



projected to the _b_ -frame; _**v**_ _IMU_ _[n]_ is the INS-indicated IMU

velocity;  _**v**_ is the velocity error in the state vector; _n_ _**l**_ _wheelb_



_b_
####  l wheel  



_**l**_











velocity;  _**v**_ is the velocity error in the state vector; _n_ _**l**_ _wheelb_

indicates the lever arm vector between the Wheel-IMU and the

_w_ -frame projected in the _b_ -frame; **C** can be obtained by Eq. _vn_

(4) and Eq. (12);  _**ψ**_ is the attitude error of the vehicle, which
is only related to the heading error in the state vector. Thus, it
can be written as  _**ψ**_  [0 0  _bn_ ] T . Finally, the velocity
error measurement equation in the _v_ -frame can be written as



 



**C**



_n_ _b_ _b_
_b_ _**l**_ _wheel_    _ib_



Then the displacement measurement model is constructed
by subtracting and integrating the two sides of Eq. (16) from
Eq. (15) respectively. Assuming that the state errors keep
constant within the integral time interval, we have







_v_ = _**v**_ _wheeln_  _**v**_ _wheeln_



ˆ

=



_**v**_ ˆ _wheeln_  _**v**_ _wheeln_
###  


_n_ _n_ ˆ _b_

 _**v**_  **C** _b_  _nb_  _**l**_
###       C bn  l wheelb     ibb  



_**S**_ = _**v**_ _n_  _**v**_







_n_ _n_ ˆ _b_ _b_

 **C** _b_  _nb_  _**l**_ _wheel_



_n_ ˆ _b_ _b_
####  C b   nb   l wheel 



**C**



 _nb_  _**l**_ _wheel_  



ˆ



(17)



 _**v**_    







_**v**_ _n_  **C** _n_   _**l**_







_v_  _**v**_ ˆ _wheelv_  _**v**_ _wheelv_



_**z**_  _**v**_  _**v**_



 


####  C vn  v n  C vn   C bn   nbb   l wheelb     C vn   v IMUn    C bn   nbb   l wheelb  



_vn_  _**v**_ _n_  **C** _vn_ **C** _bn_  _nbb_  _**l**_ _wheelb_



_**v**_ _n_  **C** _v_ **C** _n_   _**l**_



_v_ 



_n_ _b_ _b_
####  C b   nb   l wheel 



    _**v**_ 



**C** _n_ _**l**_     **C**



_bn_ _**l**_ _wheelb_    _ibb_  **C** _vn_ _**v**_ _wheelv_    _**+ e**_ _S_


###  l wheelb     ibb    C vn v wheelv 



_**l**_     **C** _n_ _**v**_ _v_   _**+ e**_



   **C** _n_ _**v**_ _v_  



 _ib_  _v_ _**v**_ _wheel_  



**C** _v_  _**v**_ _n_  **C** _v_ **C**



 _nb_  _**l**_ _wheel_  



where _**e**_ is the measurement noise which is assumed as white _S_

Gaussian noise and



_n_ _n_ _b_ _b_
####  v IMU    C b   nb   l wheel 



(14)



_vn_ _**v**_ _IMUn_  **C** _bn_  _nbb_  _**l**_ _wheelb_



_**v**_ _n_  **C** _n_   _**l**_







**C** _v_ _**v**_ _n_  **C**



 _nb_  _wheel_  



_t_



_b_
####  l wheel  



_vn_ _bn_ _**l**_ _wheelb_    _ibb_


### 



_n_  _**v**_ _kn_  1  

 _**v**_ 



**C C** _v_ _n_



_**l**_



_n_ _**v**_ _k_  1  _**v**_

_**v**_ 



_n_  _**v**_ _kn_  1   _**v**_ _kn_



_**v**_ _k_  1 





~~Δ~~ _t_
2











  



 1



_B._ _Displacement Increment Measurement_


Fig. 3 Illustration of the displacement increment measurement (Top view).


The output of a standard odometer can be either the
instantaneous vehicle velocity or the forward distance since
last sampling time [20]. In this study, the gyroscope readings
of the Wheel-IMU in the _x_ -axis are leveraged to obtain wheel



_C._ _Contact Point Zero-velocity Measurement_


Fig. 4 shows the principle of constructing the contact point
zero-velocity measurement. Unlike the velocity measurement
model where the velocity of the Wheel-IMU is projected to the
wheel center in the _v_ -frame, in the contact point zero-velocity
measurement model, the IMU velocity is projected to the
contact point _p_ of the wheel in the _n_ -frame. The measurement
is built based on the fact that under general vehicle motion
conditions (no slip and jumping), the velocity of the contact
point on the wheel with respect to the ground is zero, namely,

_**v**_ _np_ [] [0 0 0] T .


Let the wheel roll to the right with velocity _[v]_ _o_ [ and the ]
angular rate of the wheel be , then, the velocity of the



_kn_ Δ _t_   _**v**_ _kn_   _**v**_ _kn_



 _**v**_ _n_ Δ _t_   _**v**_ _kn_  



_**v**_ _n_ Δ _t_  _**v**_ _k_  _**v**_ _k_



 _n_  _k_ 



 1





Δ _t_  Δ _t_
2
Δ _t_  Δ _t_  _**v**_ _n_
### 2   



_t_  Δ _t_



(18)



Δ _t_

_t_ 



 _**v**_ _n_
###   


### 



_kn_ Δ _t_   _**v**_ _n_



 _**v**_ _n_ Δ _t_  



_**v**_ _t_  _**v**_



 


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



contact point _p_ with respect to the wheel center _o_ is _v_ _op_   _r_,
pointing to left. Assuming that there is no slipping and
jumping of the wheel, the magnitude of the velocity of the
wheel center _v_ _o_ is equal to that of _v_ ( _op_  _r_ ), whereas the
directions of them are opposite. Consequently, the velocity of
the contact point _p_ with respect to the _n_ -frame is zero. This
scheme is similar to the foot-mounted IMU-based pedestrian
navigation system [26, 42]. When a person is walking, his or
her feet alternate between a stationary stance phase and a
moving stride phase. Therefore, the foot-IMU can be used to
detect the stance phase thereby the ZUPT can be performed to
limit the error accumulation. While in our case, it is
unnecessary to determine the stationary time because there is
always a point on the wheel contacting with the ground.


Fig. 4 Construction of the contact point zero-velocity measurement (Side view).  is the roll angle of the IMU; _**l**_ _oyb_ and _**l**_ _ozb_ are the lever arm of the

Wheel-IMU in the _y_ - and _z_ -axes, respectively; _r_ is the wheel radius; _o_ is the
wheel center; _p_ is the contact point between the wheel and the ground.


The velocity of _p_ in the _n_ -frame indicated by INS is
_**v**_ ˆ _np_  _**v**_ ˆ _IMUn_  **C** ˆ _bn_   ˆ _ibb_   _**l**_ ˆ _pb_ (19)







ˆ

_v p_,  _**v**_



_v p_,  _**v**_ _np_  _**v**_ _np_



_**z**_  _**v**_  _**v**_



 



_IMUn_   _**v**_ _n_  _**v**_ _np_







 _**v**_  _**v**_ 



_**v**_  _**v**_  _**v**_



  0  
  **I**     **C** _bn_  _**l**_ _bp_  _r_  cos     _ibb_    _ibb_  
  sin  

=  _**v**_ _n_    **C** _bn_ ( _**l**_ _bp_  )  _ibb_   

  0  
 **C** _bn_   _r_ cos     _ibb_  **C** _bn_ ( _**l**_ _bp_  )   _ibb_  _**e**_ _vp_
  _r_ sin  



 **I**     **C** _bn_  _**l**_ _bp_  _r_  cos     _ibb_    _ibb_ 



6


(21)



  **C** _bn_ _**l**_ _p_  _r_ cos    _ib_   



**I**   **C**



_n_ _b_ _b_ _b_
_b_  _**l**_ _p_  _r_ cos    _ib_    _ib_  _**e**_ _vp_



_**l**_  _r_ cos       _**e**_



_r_



0

cos



    _ib_  
 



sin



_**v**_ _n_  **C** _n_ ( _**l**_



 _ib_  







_n_  **C** _bn_ ( _**l**_ _bp_  )  _ibb_



_n_ _b_ _b_

 **C** _b_ ( _**l**_ _p_  )  _ib_ 



**C**



=  _**v**_ _n_  **C** _bn_ ( _**l**_  )



0 
cos     _ibb_  **C** _bn_ ( _**l**_ _bp_  )

_r_ sin  



_bn_  _r_ cos    _ibb_  **C** _bn_ ( _**l**_ _bp_  )   _ibb_  _**e**_ _vp_



**C** _n_ _r_ cos    **C**



_**l**_  )    _**e**_



_r_



   



_r_



    _ib_  **C** _bn_ ( _**l**_ _p_  ) 
 



where _**l**_ [ˆ] is the vector from the Wheel-IMU center _p_ _[b]_ _b_ to the

contact point _p_ projected in the _b_ -frame. Obviously, _**l**_ [ˆ] _p_ _[b]_

changes periodically with the rotation of the wheel; thus, it
should be calculated in real time, shown as follows



 _**l**_ _o xb_   0   _**l**_ _o xb_   0 
 _b_   ˆ   _b_   
  _**l**_ _o y_   _r_  sin    _**l**_ _o y_   _r_  sin     
 _**l**_ _o zb_   cos  ˆ   _**l**_ _o zb_   cos     
 0 

_b_  

 _**l**_ _p_  _r_ cos  
 sin 



 _**l**_ _o xb_   0   _**l**_ _o xb_   0

ˆ _b_  _b_   ˆ   _b_  

_**l**_ _p_   _**l**_ _o y_   _r_  sin    _**l**_ _o y_   _r_  sin  

 _**l**_ _o zb_   cos ˆ   _**l**_ _o zb_   cos  



_o xb_  0  _**l**_ _o xb_



_**l**_ _o x_ _**l**_

ˆ _b_  _b_   ˆ  

_**l**_ _p_   _**l**_ _o y_   _r_  sin    _**l**_

 _**l**_ _b_   ˆ   _**l**_



_b_ _b_ _b_
_p_   _**l**_ _o y_   _r_  sin    _**l**_ _o y_



(20)



   _**l**_ _o y_   _r_  sin    
 ˆ   _**l**_ _o zb_   cos    



_r_   _r_



   
   



_o zb_ cos ˆ _**l**_ _o zb_



where _**e**_ _vp_ is the measurement noise, modeled as white
Gaussian noise.


Comparing with the other two measurements, the contact
point zero-velocity measurement is more versatile and
extensible, because all the ground vehicles, including wheeled
robots, quadruped robots, and even pedestrians, have a point
periodically contacting to the ground during their locomotion.
Hence the contact point zero-velocity measurement can be
straightforwardly utilized to correct the error drift of INS by
mounting the IMU at an appropriate place of the vehicle to
project its velocity to the contact point.


IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS


This section provides and analyzes the experimental results
to compare the performance of the proposed three different
measurement models-based Wheel-INS. We evaluate the

navigation performance of the three algorithms in both terms
of positioning and heading through multiple sets of
experiments with different vehicles and environments. Firstly,
the experimental conditions and environments are described.
Then, the performance comparison between the three
measurement models is presented and analyzed.


_A._ _Experimental Description_


Field tests were conducted in three different places in
Wuhan, China with two different ground vehicles. One was the
Pioneer 3DX robot, a typical differential drive wheeled robot,
and the other was a car. The Pioneer robot was used for two

tests and the car for one. Fig. 5 shows the experimental
platforms.


(a) Pioneer 3DX robot.



_**l**_



_b_

_p_



_r_



0

cos



 




sin



where  is the roll angle error of the Wheel-IMU. As the
same as the other two measurement models, the vehicle should
also be assumed to move on the horizontal plane in the contact
point zero-velocity measurement model, because the contact
point determined by the Wheel-IMU is slightly different from
the real contact point when the vehicle is moving uphill or
downhill. Combining Eq. (19) and (20), the contact point
zero-velocity measurement can be derived.


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



7



(b) Car.


Fig. 5 Test platforms used in the real-world experiments.


TABLE I

T ECHNICAL P ARAMETERS OF THE IMU S U SED IN THE E XPERIMENTS


IMU ICM20602 POS320 LD A15


Gyro Bias ( deg _h_ ) 200 0.5 0.02


Angle Random Walk

0.24 0.05 0.003
( deg _h_ )


Accelerometer Bias



(



2 0.01 0.00025 0.00015
_m s_ )



Velocity Random Walk



The MEMS IMU used in the experiments was a
self-developed IMU module, containing four ICM20602
(TDK InvenSense) inertial sensor chips, a chargeable battery
module, a microprocessor, a SD card for data collection, and a
Bluetooth module for communication and data transmission.

The IMU module can be connected with an android phone to
record the raw data. We collected the outputs of two chips
(logging at 200 Hz) in one trajectory as two sets of
experimental data for post-processing. The MEMS IMU was
carefully placed on the wheel to make them as close as
possible to the wheel center. As shown in Fig. 5, the two
vehicles were also equipped with two high-accuracy position
and orientation systems to provide reference pose: POS320
(MAP Space Time Navigation Technology Co., Ltd., China)
with a tactical-grade IMU for the robot experiments and LD
A15 (Leador Spatial Information Technology Co., Ltd., China)
with a navigation-grade IMU for the car experiments. Their
main technique parameters are listed in TABLE I. The
reference data were processed through a smoothed
post-processed kinematic (PPK)/INS integration method.
Technical references for generating the pose ground truth can
be found in [43, 44]. The time synchronization between the



MEMS IMU and the reference system was achieved via
Bluetooth communication.


(a) Track I in the Information Department of Wuhan University.


(b) Track II in the experimental farms in the Huazhong Agriculture University.


(c) Track III in the Wuhan University campus.


Fig. 6 Experimental trajectories.


TABLE II

V EHICLE M OTION I NFORMATION IN THE E XPERIMENTS



Track Vehicle Average Total
Speed (m/s) Distance (m)


1
I 1.39  1227



Test Track Vehicle Average
Speed (m/s)



I 1.39  1227

2 Pioneer


3 3DX
II 1.25  1146
4



Pioneer



3DX



5
III Car 4.70  12199
6


Fig. 6 shows the three test trajectories. Track I is a loopback
trajectory in a small-scale environment in the Information
Department of Wuhan University, on which the robot moved
five times. Track II is a polyline trajectory with no return in the
Huazhong Agriculture University. Track III is a large loop
trajectory in the campus of Wuhan University, on which the
robot moved approximately two times. The vehicle motion


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



8



information of all the six tests is presented in TABLE II.

In our experiments, we used the approach proposed in [29]
to calibrate and compensate the mounting angles before data
processing. The lever arm was measured manually for three
times to get the mean value. The initial heading, velocity, and
position of Wheel-INS were given by the reference system
directly. We chose this simple method for the initial alignment
of INS because we mainly focused on the DR performance of
Wheel-INS. However, other alignment methods should be
investigated for practical applications. The static IMU data
before the vehicle started moving were used to estimate the
initial roll and pitch, as well as the initial gyroscope bias of the
Wheel-IMU. The initial values of other inertial sensor errors



were set as zero. The update frequency was set as 2 Hz in all
the three measurement models-based Wheel-INS.


In our previous research on Wheel-INS [24], we have
illustrated the advantages of Wheel-INS in terms of DR
performance and resilience to the gyroscope bias through
extensive field experiments. Therefore, in this paper, the
experimental analysis mainly focuses on the comparison of the
three measurement models in Wheel-INS.


_B._ _Performance Comparison of the Three Measurements_


The positioning error in the horizontal plane and the heading
error of the three measurement models in Test 1 and Test 5 are

presented in Fig. 7.



(a) The position and heading errors of the three measurement models in Test 1.      (b) The position and heading errors of the three different models in Test 5.


Fig. 7 The positioning errors in the north and east direction, and the heading error of the three measurement models-based Wheel-INS in Test 1 and Test 5.
“Velocity”, “Displacement”, and “Contact Point” indicate the velocity measurement, the displacement increment measurement, and the contact point zero-velocity
measurement, respectively.



It’s obvious in Fig. 7 that there is no significant difference
between the navigation errors of the three measurement
models-based Wheel-INS on the whole. They show similar
positioning and heading error drift in views of both the whole
and local trajectory. However, it can be observed in Fig. 7 (a)
that the displacement increment measurement-based
Wheel-INS shows different drift trend in about 140s in Test 1.

This can be considered as a stochastic phenomenon owing to
the random error since we have processed the data from other
IMU chips inside the same IMU module in Test 1 and this is
not always the case.

It is common to calculate the maximum position drift of the
entire trajectory or the misclosure error to evaluate the
positioning performance of a DR system in the community.
However, this metric is not strict because the loop of the
trajectory will suppress error accumulation to some extent,
especially for INS in which the positioning error always drifts
in one direction. For example, it can be observed from Fig. 7 (a)
that when the robot turns around, the positioning error starts to
drift along the opposite direction. Therefore, we use the mean
drift rate as the evaluation ariterion here. Firstly, we
accumulated the traveled distance of the vehicle by a certain
increment ( _l_ ) and calculated the horizontal position error drift
rate (equaling to the maximum horizontal positioning error in



current traveled distance divided by the traveled distance)
within each distance (, 2, 3,... _l_ � _l_ _l_ ). Then, the mean value
(MEAN) and standard deviation (STD, 1  ) were computed
as the final indicator of positioning performance. This
approach is similar to the odometry evaluation metric
proposed in the KITTI dataset [45], but we segmented the
trajectory only from the starting point. With regard to the
heading error, the maximum (MAX) and root mean square
error (RMSE) were calculated. In this work, we chose _l_ as
100 m. Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show the position drift rate in the
horizontal plane of the three systems (which is a function of
the traveled distance) in Test 1 and Test 5, respectively.


Fig. 8 The horizontal positioning drift rate of the three systems in Test 1.


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



9



Fig. 9 The horizontal positioning drift rate of the three systems in Test 5.


It can be observed that the drift rates of the three algorithms
are very close. In addition, the position drift rates of the three
measurements all present a downward trend with the increase
of the distance. This is due to that the loop closure in Track I
and Track III suppressed the position drift.

TABLE III lists the error statistics of the three systems in all
the six experiments. Fig. 10 draws the error statistics of the
three measurements –based Wheel-INS in all the six testes.


TABLE III

DR P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE T HREE M EASUREMENTS


Position Drift Rate (%) Heading Error (  )

Test No. Measurement

MEAN STD MAX RMSE


Velocity 0.59 0.30 4.79 1.93



1


2


3


4


5


6



Displacement 0.66 0.32 4.50 **1.91**


Contact Point **0.58** 0.32 5.06 1.93


Velocity 1.43 0.54 7.93 3.88


Displacement 1.66 0.98 7.63 3.26


Contact Point **1.34** 0.58 7.03 **2.70**


Velocity 1.17 0.27 4.56 2.16


Displacement **0.96** 0.24 4.47 **2.15**


Contact Point 1.32 0.33 4.50 2.16


Velocity 1.78 0.26 10.88 4.44


Displacement 1.87 0.35 9.34 **4.18**


Contact Point **1.76** 0.43 10.83 4.94


Velocity 0.62 0.42 1.91 **0.96**


Displacement 0.61 0.44 2.70 1.28


Contact Point **0.60** 0.42 2.48 1.03


Velocity 0.83 0.43 4.97 1.60


Displacement **0.61** 0.50 2.55 1.22


Contact Point 0.66 0.47 3.53 **1.00**



From TABLE III, we can learn that in all the six
experiments, the horizontal position drift rates of all the three
measurements-based Wheel-INS are all less than 2%. And the


RMSE of the heading error are all less than 5 .

It is evident in Fig. 10 that the three measurements show an
equivalent navigation performance. It is hard to determine
which measurement model under what conditions can achieve

a better performance the other two. For instance, the
displacement increment measurement slightly outperforms the
other two measurements in Test 3, while the contact point
zero-velocity measurement generates the best position



estimation in Test 1 and Test 2. As for the heading accuracy,
the three systems also show a same level of accuracy in each
experiment.


Fig. 10 MEAN position drift rate and MAX heading error of the three methods
in all the six tests.


Basically, the three measurements leverage the same
information (wheel velocity) to construct the observation
models. In addition, all the three kinds of measurements rely
on the NHC and the horizontal motion assumption of the
vehicle. The velocity measurement utilizes the velocity of the
wheel center along with the NHC to fuse with INS directly.
The displacement increment measurement integrates the
wheel velocity in a short time interval to obtain the
incremental displacement in the _n_ -frame to suppress the error
drift of INS. And the contact point zero-velocity measurement
projects the velocity to the contact point between the wheel
and the ground, so as to construct the constraint.

However, different measurement model would cause
different error. For example, the displacement increment
model is affected by the heading error because vehicle heading
is required to project the forward distance of the vehicle to the
_n_ -frame at every IMU data epoch, while the rolling angle error
of the Wheel-IMU would be introduced in the velocity
projection process in the contact point zero-velocity
measurement. It is evident that the sensor errors (e.g., random
noise) of low-cost MEMS IMUs are much more significant
than the modeling error. Moreover, the rotation of the wheel
would eliminate a large part of the heading gyroscope bias
error, which is one of the main error sources of INS. As a result,
these observation information would contribute limitedly to
improve the heading accuracy. In conclusion, the DR
performance of the three measurements-based Wheel-INS
using a MEMS IMU should not be dramatically different.


V. D ISCUSSION


From the derivations of the three measurement models in

Section III, it can be learned that all the three types of
observations leverage the same vehicle motion information to
construct the measurement models: the vehicle forward

velocity and NHC. Although each algorithms exhibits its own
pros and cons, the navigation performance on the whole is at
the same level. However, it is worth mentioning that the
residual lever arm error has less impact on the displacement


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



10



increment measurement because it integrates the velocity
within a certain time interval as observation rather than the

instantaneous velocity.

To investigate the influence of the residual lever arm error
on the three measurement models, we manually added a bias in
the measured lever arm and then compared the positioning
errors of the three systems in Test 1. Because the misalignment
error in the wheel plane (namely, the lever arm in _y_ - and _z_ -axes
of the _b_ -frame) are more important, we only added errors in
these two direction, which were both set as 0.2 cm. Fig. 11
shows the corresponding positioning and heading errors of the
three systems in Test 1.


Fig. 11 The positioning error in the north and east direction, and the heading
error of the three systems in Test 1 (with additional lever arm error).


Comparing with Fig. 7(a), it can be observed that the
positioning errors of the velocity measurement and the contact
point zero-velocity measurement-based Wheel-INS have
increased. Besides, there is an obvious vibration in the
positioning error of these two systems. In the velocity
measurement model and the contact point zero-velocity
measurement model, the lever arm is essential to project the
velocity of the Wheel-IMU to the reference point (wheel
center and contact point). Note that the positioning error of
Wheel-INS caused by the residual lever arm error is mainly
embodied in the forward direction of the vehicle because with

the rotation of the wheel, the velocity projection error changes
its direction around the rotation axis periodically. As a result,
the positioning errors in the vehicle direction vibrate
significantly in these two systems (the velocity measurement
and contact point zero-velocity measurement-based
Wheel-INS). However, with the integration of the velocity in
the displacement increment measurement, the periodical
velocity projection error caused by the residual lever arm error
would be cancelled to some extent; thus it would not lead to
evident deterioration in the final positioning results. In
conclusion, the displacement increment measurement exhibits
a desirable immunity to the lever arm error.


VI. C ONCLUSION


In this article, a wheel-mounted MEMS IMU-based DR
system is studied. Particularly, three types of measurement



models are exploited based on the Wheel-IMU, including the
velocity measurement, displacement increment measurement,
and contact point zero-velocity measurement. Basically, the
observation information utilized in all the three measurements

is the same: wheel velocity. Although different errors are
introduced when different measurement models are

constructed, they are trivial compared to the sensor errors of
the MEMS IMU. Furthermore, a large part of the heading
gyroscope bias error, which is one of the main error sources of
INS, can be canceled with the rotation of the wheel. Therefore,
the final navigation results of Wheel-INS based on the three
measurement models should be at the same level.


Field tests with different vehicle platforms in different
environments illustrate the feasibility and equivalence of the
proposed three measurement models. The maximum
horizontal position drifts are all less than 2% of the total
travelled distance. Nonetheless, there are some specific
characteristics of these measurements. Firstly, the
displacement increment measurement shows considerable
insensitivity to the lever arm error comparing with the other
two measurements. Secondly, the velocity measurement is
more straightforward and concise to be implemented. Finally,
the contact point zero-velocity measurement exhibits better
versatility for different kinds of ground vehicles. We have
made the example data and code available to the community
[(https://github.com/i2Nav-WHU/Wheel-INS).](https://github.com/i2Nav-WHU/Wheel-INS)

Although Wheel-INS can provide considerable DR results,
the positioning errors will inevitably accumulate because of
the lack of external correction information. For the future

research, integrating other exteroceptive sensors (e.g., camera
and LiDAR) to enable the loop closure would be a promising
approach to eliminate the long-term error accumulation.


A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS


The authors would like to thank Dr. Jussi Collin for

inspiring us to investigate the contact point zero-velocity
measurement model in our private communication.


R EFERENCE


[1] P. Teunissen and O. Montenbruck, _Springer Handbook of_

_Global Navigation Satellite Systems_ . Springer, 2017.

[2] D. N. Aloi and O. V. Korniyenko, "Comparative performance

analysis of a Kalman filter and a modified double exponential
filter for GPS-only position estimation of automotive platforms
in an urban-canyon environment," _IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,_
vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2880-2892, 2007.

[3] Y. Wu, X. Niu, J. Du, L. Chang, H. Tang, and H. Zhang,

"Artificial Marker and MEMS IMU-Based Pose Estimation
Method to Meet Multirotor UAV Landing Requirements,"
_Sensors,_ vol. 19, no. 24, 2019.

[4] D. Scaramuzza and F. Fraundorfer, "Visual odometry: Part I:

The First 30 years and Fundamentals," _IEEE Robot. Autom._
_Mag.,_ vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 80-92, 2011.

[5] J. Zhang and S. Singh, "LOAM: Lidar Odometry and Mapping

in Real-time," in _Proc._ _Robot. Sci. Syst._, vol. 2, no. 9, 2014.

[6] F. Fraundorfer and D. Scaramuzza, "Visual Odometry: Part II:

Matching, Robustness, Optimization, and Applications," _IEEE_
_Robot. Autom. Mag.,_ vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 78-90, 2012.

[7] T. Shan, B. Englot, D. Meyers, W. Wang, C. Ratti, and D. Rus,


- REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <



11



"LIO-SAM: Tightly-coupled Lidar Inertial Odometry via
Smoothing and Mapping," _arXiv:2007.00258,_ 2020.

[8] T. Qin, P. Li, and S. Shen, "Vins-mono: A robust and versatile

monocular visual-inertial state estimator," _IEEE Trans._
_Robotics,_ vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1004-1020, 2018.

[9] S. Du, "Rotary inertial navigation system with a low-cost

MEMS IMU and its integration with GNSS," Ph.D., University
of Calgary, Calgary, Canada, 2015.

[10] Y. Wu, M. Wu, X. Hu, and D. Hu, "Self-calibration for land

navigation using inertial sensors and odometer: Observability
analysis," in _Proc. AIAA Guidance, Navig., Control Conf._, 2009,
p. 5970.

[11] S. Sukkarieh, "Low cost, high integrity, aided inertial navigation

systems for autonomous land vehicles," University of Sydney
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2000.

[12] E. H. Shin, "Estimation techniques for low-cost inertial

navigation," PhD, University of Calgary Calgary, Canada, 2005.

[13] G. Dissanayake, S. Sukkarieh, E. Nebot, and H. Durrant-Whyte,

"The aiding of a low-cost strapdown inertial measurement unit
using vehicle model constraints for land vehicle applications,"
_IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.,_ vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 731-747, 2001.

[14] H. Zhao, L. Miao, and H. Shao, "Adaptive Two-stage Kalman

Filter for SINS/Odometer Integrated Navigation Systems," _J._
_Navig.,_ vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 242-261, 2016.

[15] Y. Wu, C. Goodall, and N. El-Sheimy, "Self-calibration for

IMU/odometer land navigation: Simulation and test results," in
_Proc. the Int. Technol. Meeting Institute of Navig._, pp. 839–849,
2010.

[16] M. Wang, W. Wu, X. He, Y. Li, and X. Pan, "Consistent

ST-EKF for Long Distance Land Vehicle Navigation Based on
SINS/OD Integration," _IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,_ vol. 68, no.
11, pp. 10525-10534, 2019.

[17] Q. Wang, M. Fu, Z. Deng, and H. Ma, "A comparison of

loosely-coupled mode and tightly-coupled mode for INS/VMS,"
in _Proc. American Control Conf._, pp. 6346-6351, 2012.

[18] M. Aftatah, A. Lahrech, and A. Abounada, "Fusion of

GPS/INS/Odometer measurements for land vehicle navigation
with GPS outage," in _Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol._
_Appl._, pp. 48-55, 2016.

[19] Q. Fu, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, S. Li, and B. Guan, "High-Accuracy

SINS/LDV Integration for Long-Distance Land Navigation,"
_IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics,_ vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 2952-2962,
2018.

[20] W. Ouyang, Y. Wu, and H. Chen, "INS Odometer Land

Navigation by Accurate Measurement Modeling and
Multiple-Model Adaptive Estimation," _IEEE Trans. Aerosp._
_Electro. Syst.,_ vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 245-262, 2020.

[21] J. Collin, "MEMS IMU Carouseling for Ground Vehicles,"

_IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,_ vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 2242-2251, 2015.

[22] E. S. Geller, "Inertial System Platform Rotation," _IEEE Trans._

_Aerosp. Electro. Syst.,_ vol. AES-4, no. 4, pp. 557-568, 1968.

[23] P. D. Groves, _Principles of GNSS, inertial, and multisensor_

_integrated navigation systems_ . Artech House, 2013.

[24] X. Niu, Y. Wu, and J. Kuang, "Wheel-INS: A Wheel-mounted

MEMS IMU-based Dead Reckoning System,"
_arXiv:1912.07805,_ 2020.

[25] O. Mezentsev and J. Collin, "Design and Performance of

Wheel-mounted MEMS IMU for Vehicular Navigation," in
_Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inertial Sensors Syst._, pp. 1-4, 2019.

[26] E. Foxlin, "Pedestrian tracking with shoe-mounted inertial

sensors," _IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl.,_ vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 38-46,
2005.

[27] C. Kilic _et al._, "Improved Planetary Rover Inertial Navigation

and Wheel Odometry Performance through Periodic Use of
Zero-Type Constraints," in _Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell._
_Robots Syst._, pp. 552-559, 2019.




[28] B. M. Scherzinger and D. B. Reid, "Modified strapdown inertial

navigator error models," in _Proc. IEEE Position, Location Navig._
_Symp._, 11-15, pp. 426-430, 1994.

[29] Q. Chen, X. Niu, J. Kuang, and J. Liu, "IMU Mounting Angle

Calibration for Pipeline Surveying Apparatus," _IEEE Trans._
_Instrum. and Meas.,_ pp. 1-1, 2019.

[30] K. A. Rahim, "Heading drift mitigation for low-cost inertial

pedestrian navigation," University of Nottingham, Nottingham,
UK, 2012.

[31] K. R. Britting, "Inertial navigation systems analysis," Artech

House, 2010.

[32] S. I. Roumeliotis, G. S. Sukhatme, and G. A. Bekey,

"Circumventing dynamic modeling: evaluation of the error-state
Kalman filter applied to mobile robot localization," in _Proc._
_IEEE Int. Conf. on Robot. Autom._, vol. 2, pp. 1656-1663, 1999.

[33] V. Madyastha, V. Ravindra, S. Mallikarjunan, and A. Goyal,

"Extended Kalman Filter vs. Error State Kalman Filter for

Aircraft Attitude Estimation," in _Proc._ _AIAA Guidance, Navig.,_
_Control Conf._, 2011.

[34] S. J. Julier and J. K. Uhlmann, "Unscented filtering and

nonlinear estimation," _Proc. IEEE,_ vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 401-422,
2004.

[35] P. M. Djuric _et al._, "Particle filtering," _IEEE Signal Process._

_Mag.,_ vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 19-38, 2003.

[36] H. Zhao, L. Miao, and H. Shao, "Sins/odometer integrated

navigation method based on adaptive strong tracking filter," _J._
_Chinese Inertial Technol.,_ vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 156-161, 2018.

[37] H. Xiong, J. Tang, H. Xu, W. Zhang, and Z. Du, "A Robust

Single GPS Navigation and Positioning Algorithm Based on
Strong Tracking Filtering," _IEEE Sensors J.,_ vol. 18, no. 1, pp.
290-298, 2018.

[38] P. S. Maybeck, _Stochastic models, estimation, and control_ .

Academic press, 1979.

[39] R. G. Brown and P. Y. Hwang, _Introduction to random signals_

_and applied Kalman filtering_ . Wiley, 1992.

[40] R. Siegwart, I. R. Nourbakhsh, and D. Scaramuzza, _Introduction_

_to autonomous mobile robots_ . MIT press, 2011.

[41] G. Yan and J. Weng, _Strapdown Inertial Navigation Algorithm_

_and Principles of Integrated Navigation_ . Northwestern
Polytechnical University Press, 2019.

[42] S. Godha and G. Lachapelle, "Foot mounted inertial system for

pedestrian navigation," _Meas. Sci. Technol.,_ vol. 19, no. 7, p.
075202, 2008.

[43] X. Niu _et al._, "Development and evaluation of GNSS/INS data

processing software for position and orientation systems,"
_Survey Review,_ vol. 47, no. 341, pp. 87-98, 2015.

[44] T. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Gao, Q. Chen, and X. Niu, "High-Accuracy

Positioning in Urban Environments Using Single-Frequency
Multi-GNSS RTK/MEMS-IMU Integration," _Remote Sensing,_
vol. 10, no. 2:205, 2018.

[45] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, "Are we ready for

autonomous driving? The KITTI vision benchmark suite," in
_Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog._, pp. 3354-3361,
2012.


