1


## A Unified Initial Alignment Method of SINS Based on FGO

Hanwen Zhou, Xiufen Ye, Senior Member, IEEE



**Abstract—The initial alignment provides an accurate attitude**
**for SINS (strapdown inertial navigation system).**

**By further estimating the IMU’s bias and misalignment angle,**
**the recursive Bayesian filter is accurate. However, the prior**
**heading error has significant influence on the convergence speed**
**and accuracy. In addition, the accuracy will be limited by its**
**iteration at a single time-step.**

**Coarse alignment method OBA (optimization-based alignment)**
**uses MLE (maximum likelihood estimation) to find the optimal**
**attitude quickly. However, few methods consider the IMU bias and**
**misalignment angle, which will reduce the attitude accuracy.**

**In this paper, a unified method based on FGO (Factor graph**
**optimization) and IBF (inertial base frame) is proposed. The**
**attitude is estimated by MLE, IMU bias and misalignment angle**
**are estimated by MAP estimation. The state of all time steps is**
**optimized together to further improve the accuracy. Physical**
**experiments on the rotation MEMS SINS show that the heading**
**accuracy of this method is improved in limited alignment time.**


_**Index Terms**_ **—Initial alignment, Factor graph optimization,**
**SINS, Self-alignment, Rotation SINS**


I. I NTRODUCTION
# T he initial alignment process can provide the precise initial attitude for SINS, which can be achieved through process

data from IMU and additional sensors like GPS[24][25]. This
study focuses on initial alignment using only IMU data, which
is also called self-alignment. The existing initial alignment
method can be divided into three groups. 1.Coarse alignment
method based on OBA and IBF. 2.Fine alignment method based
on recursive Bayesian filter. 3.Two-procedure initial alignment
method.


1. Coarse alignment method based on OBA and IBF
The coarse alignment provides a coarse attitude, which can
be solved by SVD [2]. In recent years, the batch estimating
method OBA and IBF are raised [1][4][5]. These methods are
more robust to motivation by using the integral of specific force
as measurement. These methods can directly determine the best
initial attitude, which can be regarded as MLE, and the
convergence speed is very fast. However, there are few methods
considering the bias error of the IMU, which will lead to
significant errors [1]. The method in [23] consider the bias
estimating, but this method can only be used for stationary IMU.
Method in [3] estimating the gyro’s bias without accelerator’s


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 41876100 and 42276187) and the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities(Grant No. 3072022FSC0401). Hanwen Zhou, Xiufen
Ye are with the College of Intelligent Systems Science and Engineering, Harbin



bias by adding a recursive Bayesian filter MUSQUE. However,
the recursive filter will decrease the accuracy without multiiteration.


Recursive Bayesian filter Batch estimator True position







Measurement at T1


Measurement at T2


Measurement at T3



Fig. 1. MLE of Batch estimator usually converge faster than MAP

estimation of recursive Bayesian filter


2. Fine alignment method based on recursive Bayesian filter
The recursive Bayesian filter is proposed by fine alignment
methods. These estimators consider the priori information,
which can be seen as MAP (maximum posteriori) estimation,
e.g., Kalman filter or PF [6]. When the initial attitude error is
large, the conventional fine alignment algorithm tends to
diverge due to its strong nonlinearity and low observability [7]

[8] [9]. Since then, the methods based on Lie group theory have
been proposed to improve the convergence speed and the
stability, such as the invariant Kalman filter [15][17] and the
state transformation extended Kalman filter [16]. Along with
these methods are still based on Bayesian filter, the
convergence time is still long in the case of large initial attitude
error. There is an example to explain why the MLE of batch
estimator converges faster than MAP of recursive Bayesian
filter. As shown in Fig. 1, there are three bearing measurements
of feature points at three different positions. The MLE finds the
optimal location directly. The estimated position of recursive
Bayesian filter starts from an initial position and gradually
converges to the true position. If the initial position is far from
the true position, the estimated result will be worse. In addition,
most recursive Bayesian filter only iterate once at a single time
step, which reduces the accuracy.

3. Two-procedure initial alignment method with OBA and
recursive method


The two-procedure initial alignment methods consist of the
coarse alignment and the fine alignment method. First of all,
coarse alignment is employed to get a coarse attitude. After a
few seconds, fine alignment is used to improve the results.
Since then, the BP (backward process) is raised to using these
data more efficiently [26], However, the KF in this method is


Engineering University, Heilongjiang 150001, China., E[mail:(yexiufen@hrbeu.edu.cn). (Corresponding author: Xiufen Ye).](mailto:yexiufen@hrbeu.edu.cn)


only optimal at single time step without multi-iteration.

To sum up, existing OBA methods has a fast convergence
speed but most methods don’t consider the IMU bias and
misalignment angle, which will cause additional attitude error.
The fine alignment method is more accurate, but its
convergence speed is slow. The two-procedure initial alignment
still contains a recursive Bayesian filter, only optimal at single
time step without multi-iteration.

Recently, batch estimator FGO has been widely used in
SLAM and integration navigation [10]-[14]. This method can
estimate the associated state as a constant value or a changing
sequence [18]. And method can select to estimate the state by
considering or not considering the prior information. In other
words, the FGO can choose to use MLE and MAP on different
states. Based on this property, we can use the MLE to estimate
the initial attitude at the starting moment, and use the MAP
estimation to estimate the remaining states. Unlike twoprocedure method solving the MLE and MAP problem in
different procedure, this method solving the problems of MLE
and MAP at the same time. Furthermore, the state of all time
steps is optimized together to further improve the accuracy [19].

There are two main contributions in this paper:
1.Different from regular SINS state defined in the navigation
coordinates frame, we choose to use the state and dynamic
model in IBF, which is helpful to reduce the nonlinearity of
system and make the optimization process become more stable.

2. The initial alignment problem is constructed as factor
graph, the optimal value is solved by FGO, the initial consist
attitude is estimated by MLE and the remaining states is
estimated by MAP estimation. The state of all time steps is
optimized together. This method converges fast like OBA and
is more accurate than the existing method.

This paper is structured as follows. The brief introduction of
different alignment methods and the structure of the proposed
method are illustrated in section Ⅱ. The error dynamic model
and measurement model in IBF are given in section Ⅲ. The
unified method based on FGO is proposed in section Ⅳ.
Simulations and experiments are given in sections Ⅴ and Ⅵ,
and the conclusions are summarized in section Ⅶ.


II. M ETHOD OF C OMBINING THE C OARSE A LIGNMENT W ITH


F INE A LIGNMENT


In this section, the method of coarse alignment and fine
alignment are introduced at first, and then the advantages and
disadvantages of each method are analyzed. After that, the
system overview of the proposed method is given out.

The nomenclature of the coordinates frames in this paper is
listed in TABLE I, the different coordinates frames can also be
seen in Fig. 2.


TABLE I

NOMENCLATURE

Symbol Description
_n_ Ideal local level navigation coordinate frame with
east-north-up geodetic axes
_b_ Body coordinate frame


Nonrotating initial body coordinate frame at start

_[i]_ _[b]_ 0
time of initial alignment



2


_i_ _b_ 0 The calculated initial body coordinate frame at the start time of initial alignment

_i_ _n_ 0 Nonrotating initial navigation coordinate frame at start time of initial alignment
_i_ Nonrotating earth center coordinate frame

_e_ Earth coordinate frame

As shown in Fig. 2, _i_ is the earth center coordinate frame.

_i_ _b_ 0 is an inertial frame, which is coincides with the body


coordinate frame at the start time. _i_ _n_ 0 is an inertial frame


coinciding with a local navigation frame at the start time. _g_ _n_

indicates the gravity in _n_ frame.


_z_



_C_ _ii_ _b_ 0 .



_b_ 0


_n_ 0







_y_







_x_


Fig. 2. Coordinates frame definition


_A._ _Coarse Alignment Based on OBA and IBF_


The OBA method divides initial alignment into two parts,
one part is attitude tracking, which is responsible for updating

DCM (direction cousin matrix) _C_ _b_ _[i]_ _b_ 0, and the other part is



responsible for determining the constant initial attitude



_C_ _ii_ _n_ 0 .



_n_ 0


_b_ 0



0



_C_ _in_ = _C_ _ni_ _n_ 0 ' is easy to be obtained through (4), the output



Since


DCM



_n_ 0 '



_C_ _bn_ = _C C C_ _in_ _ii_ _n_ 0 _bi_ _b_ 0 .



_n_ 0



_C_ can be collected through _bn_



_n_ _b_



0 0



_n_ 0 _b_ 0



1. Attitude track in inertial frame—calculating the _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0


Differential equation of DCM can be written as (1):



_C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 = _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 (  _i bb_ _b_ 0  ) (1)



_b_ _b_ 0 = _C_ _b_ _b_ 0 (  _i b_ _b_ 0  )



0 0



_b_



where, _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 can be expressed as (2) :



_bi_ _b_ 0 = _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 _C_ _bb_ _k_



_b_ 0 _b_ 0 _k_ −



_C_ _b_ 0 = _C_ _b_ 0 _C_



0 0 _k_ − 1



−



=



_k_ − 1



1



(2)



_k_ − 1 _T_ **ω** _i_ 



_bb_ _k_ − 1 =exp _T_ **ω** _ii_



_C_ _k_ − 1 _T_



_k_



=exp



1



( ( _T_ **ω** _iib_ )  )



_b_ _ib_



The exp(.) represents the matrix exponential, (.) 



represents linear, skew-symmetric operator. DCM



_C_ _bi_ _b_



_b_ 0

_b_ _k_



− 1



0



represents the _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 before time interval _T_ . This DCM can be


calculated through Rodriguez formulation [19].

The attitude track doesn’t consider the bias error of IMU, the


_i_

bias error of **ω** _ib_ will cause the attitude error to increase


continuously.

2. Constant initial attitude determination—calculating the



0


3



The integration of specific forces in inertial frame


can be written as (3) :



_i_ _b_ and 0




_[i]_ _[n]_ 0



function, then



_C_ _bn_ = _C C_ _in_ _ii_ _n_ 0 _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 can be obtained, and it will not



_n_ 0 _b_ 0



_n_ 0 _b_ 0


#### ii b 0 =  kdt C bi b 0 f sfb



_b_ _b_



_F_ _i_ _b_ 0 = _C_ _b_ _b_ 0 _f_



0 0



=


####  0



_n_ 0


#### ii n 0 = −  kdt g i



_G_ _i_ _n_ 0 = − _g_ _i_



_n_



_n_ 0



= −



0
####  0



0



_n_



_C_ _ii_ _b_ 0 represents the constant initial attitude,



(3)


_f_ is _sfb_



Where the



_b_ 0


_n_



0



_n_ 0



the specific force measurement. _[g]_ _[i]_ _n_ 0, which is the projection of


gravity in _i_ can be expressed as: _n_ 0



_g_ _i_



_C_ _n_ 0 _g_



_i_ _n_



=



_n_ 0



_i_ _n_ _n_



_n_ 0







_t_



cos


 _t_



_C_ _ni_ _n_ 0



( ( _T_ **ω** _ien_ )  )



= **ω**




 

) == 



sin  _t_ sin



exp



_T_ **ω** sin  _t_ sin _L_



_ie_
_ien_ )   sin  _ie_ _t_ sin



− sin  _ie_ _t_ cos _L_
− sin  _ie_ _t_ sin _L_ sin  _ie_ _t_ cos _L_ 

1 (1 cos − −  _ie_ _t_ )sin 2 _L_ (1 cos −  _ie_ _t_ )sin _L_ cos _L_ 

(1 cos −  _ie_ _t_ )sin _L_ cos _L_ 1 (1 cos − −  _ie_ _t_ )cos 2 _L_ 



(4)



sin  _t_ cos



_t_ cos _L_







_ie_



sin  _t_ sin _L_ sin  _t_ cos



_t_ sin _L_ sin  _t_ cos _L_



 _t_ 



_ie_ _ie_



2



1 (1 cos − −  _t_ )sin _L_ (1 cos −  _t_ )sin _L_ cos



_t_ _L_ −  _t_ _L_ cos _L_



 _t_ − 



_ie_ _ie_



(1 cos −  _t_ )sin _L_ cos _L_ 1 (1 cos − −



2



_t_ _L_ cos _L_ − −  _t_



be influenced by initial attitude and can converge rapidly.


_B._ _Fine Alignment Based on Recursive Bayesian Filter_

##### The fine alignment models the SINS error as system state x :
#### x =    v    (7)

##### Where  and  v represent the misalignment angles and the velocity errors defined in the navigation frame,  and 

represent the gyro bias errors and accelerometer bias errors
respectively. With the error SINS dynamic model and
measurement equation, the Bayesian filter, e.g., KF can be
employed to estimate the system state. As a MAP estimator, the
Bayesian filter must set a prior information, and optimal at
single time step owing to the Markov assumption and the
recursive property.


_C._ _The Unified Initial Alignment Method Base on FGO_


The main difference between MAP and MLE is that the MAP

considers the prior information. The prior information
expressed by the prior factor in factor graph, we can choose not
to set prior factor for associated state to estimate them by MLE.



 _t_ cos − − 



_ie_ _ie_



)cos



_L_



Where _L_ represents the latitude,  _iei_ = 0  0  _ie_  _T_



 _iei_ = 0  0  _ie_  _T_


_T_
_g_ _n_ =  0 0 − _g_ 



The proposed FGO estimates constant initial attitude



_T_

indicates the rotation rate of the earth and _g_ _n_ =  0 0 − _g_ 


indicates the gravity vector. Then the relationship between _F_ _ii_ _b_ 0


and _G_ _ii_ _n_ 0 can be expressed as (5).



_C_ _ii_ _nb_ 00 by


### ii n 0 F ii b 0 = G ii n 0 +  kdt C ii n 0  b 0


###  0



_n_ _b_ _n_ _n_



_C_ _n_ 0 _F_ _b_ 0 = _G_ _n_ 0 + _C_



= _G_ _n_ 0 + _C_ _n_ 0 



_n_ 0 0 _n_ 0 _n_ 0 0



_b_ _b_



0



0 0



_ii_ _n_ 0 _F_ _ii_ _b_ 0  _G_ _ii_ _n_



(5)



_n_ _b_ _n_



_C_ _n_ 0 _F_ _b_ 0  _G_



_n_ 0 0 _n_ 0







MLE, and estimates the misalignment angle and the bias of
IMU by MAP. Besides, the FGO optimal the whole trajectory
with multi-iteration.


_D._ _System Overview of the Unified Initial Alignment Method_


The structure of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 3, and
the corresponding procedures are given as follows.

1.Calculating the result of attitude track, integration of
specific force and gravity, the equation is illustrated in A of
section Ⅱ.


2.Combining the system state model and the measurement
model (section Ⅲ), and construct a factor graph to represent the
relationship between measurements and states at different times.
By minimizing the cost function, we can solve the optimal value.
This is given in section Ⅳ.

3. After obtaining the optimal misalignment angle and
constant initial attitude, the optimal attitude output can be
calculated by equation (24).



_b_



0



Where  _b_ 0 represents the disturbance acceleration, _G_ _ii_ _n_ 0 is


the integration of gravity. The cost function for OBA can be
expressed as (6).



(6)



_n_
#### C ii bn 00 * = min   C ii bn 00 F ii b 0 − G ii n

 _k_ = 1



 

#### = min   n C ii bn 00 F ii b 0 − G ii n 0 

 _k_ = 1 


#### i bn 00 = min   C i bn 00 F i b 0 − G i n 0

 _k_ = 1



_n_ 0 _n_ 0 0 _n_ 0



_b_ _b_



0 0



=



_C_ _ii_ _n_ 0 can be obtained directly by minimum this



The optimal



_b_



_n_ 0


_b_ 0



0




















































|Eq.(1)(2) Eq.(11)(13) Eq.(16)(19)<br>Gyroscopes(100 Attitude track Error state Optimal<br>0Hz) (100Hz) update(0.25Hz) SINS factor IMU bias<br>Eq.(3)<br>Specific integration Section Ⅲ<br>iSnp neocnifrico tfaotricneg Optimal Calculating Attitud<br>Gauss-newton misalignment angle<br>initteigarl abtoiodny Output attitude output<br>of attitude track<br>AAcccceelleerraattoorrss((110 Eqc .o (o 3r )dinate frame Eq.(24)<br>000HHzz)) Gravity integration<br>in nonrotating Optimal Constant<br>Gravity integration Measurement factor<br>initial navigation initial attitude<br>IMU coordinate frame Eq.(18)(20) FGO|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|**Attitude track**<br>**(100Hz)**<br>**Specific integration**<br>**in nonrotating**<br>**initial body**<br>**coordinate frame**<br>**Gravity integration**<br>**in nonrotating**<br>**initial navigation**<br>**coordinate frame**<br>**Specific forcetegration**<br>**Gravity integration**<br>**Eq.(1)(2)**<br>**Eq.(3)**<br>**Eq.(3)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**<br>**Eq.(11)(13)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**<br>**Eq.(11)(13)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**<br>**Eq.(11)(13)**|**Optimal Constant**<br>**initial attitude**<br>**Optimal**<br>**misalignment angle**<br>**of attitude track**<br>**Measurement factor**<br>**SINS factor**<br>**Gauss-newton**<br>**Optimal**<br>**IMU bias**<br>**FGO**<br>**Eq.(16)(19)**<br>**Eq.(18)(20)**|**Optimal Constant**<br>**initial attitude**<br>**Optimal**<br>**misalignment angle**<br>**of attitude track**<br>**Measurement factor**<br>**SINS factor**<br>**Gauss-newton**<br>**Optimal**<br>**IMU bias**<br>**FGO**<br>**Eq.(16)(19)**<br>**Eq.(18)(20)**||
|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|**Attitude track**<br>**(100Hz)**<br>**Specific integration**<br>**in nonrotating**<br>**initial body**<br>**coordinate frame**<br>**Gravity integration**<br>**in nonrotating**<br>**initial navigation**<br>**coordinate frame**<br>**Specific forcetegration**<br>**Gravity integration**<br>**Eq.(1)(2)**<br>**Eq.(3)**<br>**Eq.(3)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**<br>**Eq.(11)(13)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**|**Optimal**<br>**IMU bias**|**Optimal**<br>**IMU bias**|
|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|**Attitude track**<br>**(100Hz)**<br>**Specific integration**<br>**in nonrotating**<br>**initial body**<br>**coordinate frame**<br>**Gravity integration**<br>**in nonrotating**<br>**initial navigation**<br>**coordinate frame**<br>**Specific forcetegration**<br>**Gravity integration**<br>**Eq.(1)(2)**<br>**Eq.(3)**<br>**Eq.(3)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**<br>**Eq.(11)(13)**|**Error state**<br>**update(0.25Hz)**|||||
|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|||||||||
|**Gyroscopes(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**Accelerators(1**<br>**00Hz)**<br>**0**<br>**Accelerators(10**<br>**0Hz)**<br>**IMU**|||||||||



**Section** **Ⅱ**



**Section** **Ⅳ**


Fig. 3 Structure of the proposed method


4



III. SINS M ODEL AND M EASUREMENT M ODEL IN IBF


There are two types of nodes in factor graph, variables and
factors. When using factor graph, the system state, the system
dynamic model and the measurement model should be
determined at first. The system states are constructed as
variables, measurement model and system model are
constructed as factors.


The regular system model of SINS defined in navigation
coordinates frame will lead to diverge of batch estimator, the
dynamic model of SINS and the measurement model defined in
IBF is illustrated in this section.


_A._ _The Nonlinear Property of Regular System Dynamic_
_Model_


The Rodrigues’s Formula can be expressed as:



of factor graph.



( _x_ 1 _x_ 2 _x_ 3 _x_ _n_ _C_ _ii_ _bn_ 00 )



_X_ = ( _x_ 1 _x_ 2 _x_ 3 _x_ _n_ _C_ _ii_ _bn_ 00 ) (10)



_n_


_b_



1 2 3 _n_ _i_ _b_ 0



_C._ _The Dynamic Model of SINS in IBF_


The attitude error differential equation of SINS [26] is
expressed as (11).

 = − _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0  _i bb_ _b_ 0 (11)

Then we derive the dynamic model for the error specific
force integration  _F_ _ib_ 0 .



_b_ 0



= − _b_ _i b_ _b_ 0



_b_


##### exp ( ( )   ) = I + sin  ( )   + 1 cos − 2  ( ( )  

 



2



  − 
##### ( ( )  ) = I + ( )  + 2 ( ( )  )



  (8)


This is nonlinear function, during the derivation of error
dynamic model of SINS, a simplify property of Rodrigues’s


 
#### Formula exp ( ( )  )  I + ( )  is employed. However, this


property can only establish when [] is small. The [] defined in
navigation coordinate frame could be large (0 to 180 degree),
which makes the system becoming highly nonlinear, resulting
in the divergence of batch estimator or recursive estimator.


_B._ _Using the System State in IBF With Better Linear Property_


We choose the state defined in IBF for the proposed method,
the corresponding state is:

_x_ _k_ =  _k_  _F_ _i_ _[i]_ _b_ 0 ( ) _k_  _k_  _k_  (9)

It is necessary to clarify exactly that the state is different with

state in regular fine alignment (7), and the  _k_ and  _F_ _ii_ _b_ 0 ( ) _k_


are defined in inertial coordinates frame at start time, _i_ _b_, but 0


not in navigation frame.  _k_ indicates the misalignment angle in


_i_ _b_, the 0  _k_ is always small because it grows from zero. The


small  _k_ guaranteed the establish of the simplify property on


 
#### Rodrigues’s Formula exp ( ( )  )  I + ( )  and make the


estimating procedure become more stability.

 _F_ _ii_ _b_ 0 ( ) _k_ represents the error of specific force integration.


[] _k_ [ represents the gyro’s bias error, ]  _k_ is the accelerator’s bias


error. Remarkably, the chosen states of attitude track [] _k_ [ and ]

 _[F]_ _i_ _[i]_ _b_ 0 ( ) _k_ are the error states, this is very important for factor


graph expressed by fewer factors. The error state will not
change fast, therefore, the time interval between the adjacent
factors can be set longer, which reduces the number of factors.

The SINS states at different times and the constant initial



 _F_ _ib_ 0 = _F_ _ib_ 0 − _F_ _ib_ 0 (12)


_b_ _b_ _b_
Define _f_ _sf_ = _f_ _sf_ +  _f_ _sf_ as the specific force measurement in _b_,



where



 _f_ _sfb_ represents the measurement error. Differential on



both sides of the (12), the equation can be further derived as
(13).







_ib_ 0 = _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_ − _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_



_F_ _i_ 0 = _C_ _b_ 0 _f_ − _C_ _b_ 0 _f_



0 0 0



= −



 _C_ _bb_ 0 ( _f_ _sfb_ +  _f_ _sfb_ ) −  _I_ + (   ) 



( _f_ _sfb_ +  _f_ _sfb_ ) −  _I_ + (   )



_bb_ 0 ( _f_ _sfb_ +  _f_ _sfb_ ) −  _I_ + (   )  _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_







 _f_ − _I_ +  



_C_ _b_ 0 _f_ +  _f_ − _I_ +   _C_ _b_ 0 _f_



0 0



_bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_ + _C_ _bb_ 0  _f_ _sfb_ − _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_ − (   ) _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_



 _f_ − _C_ _b_ 0 _f_ −  



_C_ _b_ 0 _f_ + _C_ _b_ 0  _f_ − _C_ _b_ 0 _f_ −   _C_ _b_ 0 _f_



0 0 0 0



= + − −



(   )







(   )



_bb_ 0  _f_ _sfb_ − (   ) _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_







0  _f_ − 



_C_ _b_ 0  _f_ −   _C_ _b_ 0 _f_



0 0



= −



( _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_ )



_bb_ 0  _f_ _sfb_ + _C_ _bb_ 0 _f_ _sfb_







0  _f_ + _C_ _b_ 0 _f_ 



_C_ _b_ 0  _f_ + _C_ _b_ 0 _f_



0 0



= +



_b_ _sf_ _b_ _sf_ (13)


Since the bias of the IMU does not change in a short time,
the dynamic model of SINS can be rewritten as (14).



_b_ 0
_b_



= − _C_ _b_ 0 



_C_



0



= − _b_ 









_ii_ _b_ 0 = _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0  + _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 _f_ _sfb_



_b_ _b_ _b_



= _C_ _b_ 0  +



_F_ _i_ _b_ 0 = _C_ _b_ _b_ 0  + _C_ _b_ _b_ 0 _f_ 



( _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 _f_ _sfb_ )



0 0 0



(14)







=



0


0



=



And the INS model can be defined as (15).


_INS_
##### x k + 1 = f x ( k ) + N ( 0,  k ) (15)


Where _f x_ ( _k_ ) can be expressed as (16), which is obtained by


the Eulerian method in the SINS dynamic model (14). And _dt_

is the time interval, which was set as two seconds in the
simulations and experiments.



(16)



_k_ − _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0



_k_



 _k_



_b_ 0



_C_ _b_ 0  _dt_











_ii_ _b_ 0 ( ) _k_ +  _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 + _k_ _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 _f_ _sfb_  _k_



_b_ _b_ _b_



 _F_ _i_ _b_ 0 _k_ +  _C_ _b_ _b_ 0 + _k_ _C_ _b_ _b_ 0 _f_  _k_



_f x_ ( _k_ ) =  _F_ _i_ _b_ 0 ( ) _k_ +  _C_ _b_ _b_ 0 + _k_ _C_ _b_ _b_ 0 _f_ _sf_  _k_  _dt_



( ) =  _F_ _i_ 0 _k_ +  _C_ _b_ 0 + _k_ _C_ _b_ 0



_k_



  _k_ − _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0  _k_ _dt_ 
=  _F_ _ii_ _b_ 0 ( ) _k_ +  _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 + _k_ ( _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 _f_ _sfb_ )   _k_  _dt_ 
 
  _kk_ 



( ) _k_ +  _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 + _k_ ( _C_ _bi_ _b_ 0 _f_ _sfb_ )



 _k_






_k_


_k_


##### N ( 0,  kINS ) indicates the Gauss noise and represents the



noise of the system state.


_D._ _Measurement Model of SINS in Attitude Track_


The measurement model can be expressed as (17).



attitude



_C_ _ii_ _nb_ 00 are added into system state, the state can be



expressed as (10). The state will be transformed to the variables


_i_ _nb_ 00 ) + _N_ ( 0,  _kIOSF_ )



_z_ _k_ = _h x C_ ( _k_, _ii_ _nb_ 00 ) + _N_ ( 0,  _kIOSF_ ) (17)



5


prior factor will not influence the results, and the prior factor
can also be deleted if the smoothness at beginning is not
important.


_B._ _Optimization and Jacobian Calculation_


The FGO can be transformed into minimizing a quadratic
function[20][21].



_h x C_ ( _k_, _i_ _nb_ 00 ) + _N_ ( 0,



_n_



where



_h x C_ ( _k_, _ii_ _b_ 0 ) is expressed as:



_h x C_ ( _k_, _i_ _nb_ 00 )



0



_n_


#### h x C ( k, ii nb 00 )= − C ii nb 00  0 k g dt n 0 − ( F ii b 0 ( ) k −  F ii b 0 ( ) k ) (18)


#### i nb 00 )= − C ii nb 00  0 k g dt n 0 − ( F ii b 0 ( ) k −  F ii b 0 ( ) k )


#### h x C ( k, i nb 00 )= − C i nb 00  0 g dt n 0 − F i b 0 ( ) k −  F i b



_n_ _n_



And _N_ ( 0,  IOSF _k_ ) representing the noise of measurement.


IV. U NIFIED I NITIAL A LIGNMENT M ETHOD OF SINS B ASED


ON FGO


In section Ⅲ, the dynamic model and the measurement
model in IBF have been illustrated. In this section, we construct
a unified initial alignment method based on FGO.


_A._ _Formulations_



−

=



−  exp

lim


##### X * = arg min  k e kINS  2 kINS + e kIOSF 2  kIOSF + e PRIOP  2 PRIOR



(22)



_k_, _ii_ _n_ 0 ) − exp (   ) exp (   )  _k_ _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp (   )  _k_ _n_ 0



_h x C_ (, _n_ 0 ) − exp   exp   _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp   _g dt_ _n_ 0



 _h x C_ ( _n_ 0 ) −   _n_ 0 +



_h x C_ ( _k_, _i_ _n_ 0 ) − exp  exp  _g dt_ 0 + exp



_n_ 0 0 0



_n_ 0


_b_ 0



  exp   _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp 



  _n_ 



(   ) exp (   )  _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp (   )



 0 _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp (   )  0



0 0



 _C_ _i_ _n_ 0 =



lim

→ 0



_i_ _n_ 0
_i_ _b_ 0







_C_



0



→



_k_ _n_  _k_ _n_



 0 _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp (   )  0



( _I_ +  ) exp (   )  _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp (   )



  _n_ 



  exp   _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp  



_I_ +  exp   _g dt_ _n_ 0 + exp   _g dt_ _n_ 0



0 0



 lim − + exp  0 _g dt_ +



lim − + exp 0 + exp



0 0



0







→



→



(   ) exp (   )



0



_k_ _n_



 



0



  exp 



)  0



_g dt_ _n_ 0



0







→



→



( exp (   )  0 _k_ _g dt_ _n_ 0 ) 



  _g dt_ _n_ 0 



 _k_ _n_ 



_k_ _n_



0



**start time of self-alignment**



=



**x** **k**



**SINS State** _C_ _ii_ _bn_ 00 **Constant initial attitude at the start time of self-alignment**


**INS Factor**



_C_ _ii_ _n_ 0



_n_ 0


_b_ 0



_g dt_ _n_ 0



0



exp
lim



0



→



→



**Prior Factor**



**INS Factor** **Measurement Factor**



 0









 0



=



( _C_ _ii_ _nb_ 00  0 _k_ _g dt_ _n_ 0 )



_C_ _i_ _b_ 0 _g dt_ _n_ 0



_i_ _b_ 0 _k_ _n_ 0
_i_ 



_b_

_i_ _n_ 0



0 0





_i_ _n_ 0 0 (23)


Then, the Gauss-Newton method is used to minimize this
function. To calculate the Jacobian matrix, the perturbation 

is applied on the left respect to DCM [19], then the Jacobian
matrix can be calculated as (23).





Fig. 4 Factor graph structure of the improved method


Fig. 4 shows the factor graph structure of the proposed
method, in which the SINS state is represented by circles, and
the factors are represented by squares, set as follows:

1.INS factor

The error function of INS factor can be expressed as (19).

_e_ _kINS_  2 _kINS_ = _x_ _k_ + 1 − _f x_ ( _k_ )  2 _kINS_ (19)

2.Measurement factor

The error function of measurement factor can be expressed
as (20).



_C._ _Optimal attitude output_


After getting the optimal



_n_ 0


_b_ 0



_C_ _ii_ _n_ 0 and



_C_ _ii_ _bb_ 00, the optimal output



_n_ 0



DCM can be expressed as (24).



_C_ _bn_ = _C C C C_ _in_ _ii_ _n_ 0 _ii_ _b_ 0 _bi_ _b_



(24)



_n_ _b_ _b_



_n_ 0 0 0



= _i_ _n_ 0 _i_ _b_ 0 _i_ _b_ 0



_n_ 0 _b_ 0 _b_



2 = _z_ − _h x C_ (, _i_ _n_ 0 ) 2



_e_ _kIOSF_  _kIOSF_ = _z_ _k_ − _h x C_ ( _k_, _ii_ _bn_ 00 ) 



0


0



 _kIOSF_ _b_ 0  _kIOSF_



 _k_ 0  _k_ (20)


3.Prior factor

The error function of prior factor can be expressed as (21).



V. S IMULATION


_A._ _Simulation Setup_


The simulation compared the heading results of five different
methods, the first one is the conventional two procedure method
OBA with Kalman filter[6], in which the OBA method works
for the first 60s, followed by KF; the second one is the recursive
method ST-EKF [16], the third one is the OBA method [4]. The
fourth method is the OBA method with KF and BP (backward
process) [26], in order to get the heading error changing with
time, we run this method every 20 seconds, save the results of
last 20 seconds, and put the results together. The last one is the
method proposed in this paper.

Simulation tests were set up under mooring conditions, bias
error are added into the raw IMU data, where gyro bias are set



2 2

 _PRIOR_ = _r_ _PRIOR_ − _H_ _PRIOR_ _x_ 1 



_PRIOR_ _PRIOR_ = _r_ _PRIOR_ − _H_ _PRIOR_ _x_ 1 _PRIOR_



_e_ = _r_ − _H_ _x_



= −



_PRIOR_ _PRIOR_







_r_ _PRIOR_



_r_



12 12 



=



0



_H_ = _I_







_H_ _PRIOR_ = _I_ 12 12  (21)


With a suitable prior information, the estimation of states will
be smoother in beginning. It is necessary to clarify that this prior



=



_PRIOR_



12 12 



_b_ _b_ _b_
as  _x_ =-8°/h,  _y_ =6°/h,  _z_ =-7°/h, bias of accelerator are set as



_n_ 0


_b_ 0


#####  bx =1mg,  by =-1mg,  bz =1mg. The IMU in simulation and

experiment will continuously rotated [22] to improve the
observability of the misalignment angle and bias of gyros, and
all these states will become observable. Each method was tested

for 10 minutes, and RMSE (Root Mean Square Error) was
chosen as the evaluation criterion.



_C_ _ii_ _n_ 0 can still be



0



factor not set for the



_C_ _ii_ _n_ 0 . The estimation of



_n_ 0

_i_ _b_ 0



0



_b_



seen as MLE. Where  _PRIOR_ is diagonal matrix, which


represents the noise of initial state. The _r_ _PRIOR_ = 0 12 12  is very

suitable, because the misalignment angle and the specific error
are zero at beginning, and the gyro’s bias is very small. This


6



_B._ _Simulation Results and Analysis_


Fig. 5 Heading error of different methods


As shown in Fig. 5, The upper part of the diagram shows the
heading error of 600 seconds, the proposed method and the
OBA method based on batch estimator converge to zero very
fast. The method with BP also converges very fast by three
times forward KF and backward process, the influence of prior
information is reduced.


TABLE II

H EADING RMSE OF DIFFERENT I NITIAL ALIGNMENT METHODS



the optimal on whole trajectory will improve the accuracy.

To sum up, there are two conclusions.



states as MAP, the proposed method based on FGO has a faster
converge speed than recursive method STEKF or KF.

2.With the same alignment time, the proposed method is
more accurate than existing OBA method through estimating
the IMU bias and misalignment angle. And the method also
accurate than other method with the rapid converge speed and
the multiple optimize on the state of all time steps.


VI. P HYSICAL E XPERIMENT


_A. Physical Experiment Setup_


Dual-antenna receivers were set as attitude references. As

shown in Fig. 7, GPS antennas were set up in the fore and aft of
a ship, and the length of the baseline was 15 meters. Thus, the

° °
accuracy of the attitude reference was about 0.2 /15  0.013 .

The system was fixed on the deck of the ship. All of the
connections were tight.



1.By estimate the



_C_ _ii_ _n_ 0 like MLE and estimate the other



_n_ 0


_b_ 0



0



Average heading
RMSE



OBA+



OBA+KF
OBA STEKF
KF +BP



Method in


this paper



+BP



50-100 sec 25.268 23.128 42.784 20.015 **8.028**


150-200 sec 5.436 7.000 17.564 **3.635** 3.882


250-300 sec 3.577 3.821 4.583 2.857 **2.232**


550-600 sec 1.684 2.947 0.571 0.872 **0.104**


Fig. 6 Estimated results of Gyro bias

The heading RMSE in different times is shown in TABLE II.
Between 50 and 200 seconds, the RMSE of the OBA method
and the proposed method is better than that of STEKF and KF,
because the batch estimation converges faster than the Bayesian
filter. Between 250 and 600 seconds, the heading RMSE of KF
and the proposed method is smaller than OBA, because they
estimate the gyro’s bias and misalignment angle. As shown in
Fig. 6, the proposed method has the best bias estimation effect
for gyros, especially Z-axis gyro. The heading RMSE of the
proposed method is 0.104 between 550 and 600 seconds, and
its performance is still better than other methods after 250
seconds. There are two reasons why the proposed method has
the best accuracy:

1.The MLE of the batch estimator converges more rapidly
than the MAP of recursive Bayesian filter in initial alignment.

2.In each iteration of FGO, a re-linearization and optimal on
the state of all time steps is performed. The multiple relinearization can effectively mitigate the linearization error, and


|GPS GPS<br>Antenna Antenna<br>15m<br>DUAL-antenna Rotation<br>GPS receiver SINS|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|15m<br>**DUAL-antenna**<br>**GPS receiver**<br>**GPS**<br>**Antenna** <br>**Rotation**<br>**SINS** <br>**GPS**<br>**Antenna**|**Rotation**<br>**SINS**|**Rotation**<br>**SINS**|
|**DUAL-antenna**<br>**GPS receiver**|**DUAL-antenna**<br>**GPS receiver**|**Rotation**<br>**SINS**|



Fig. 7. Experiment ship and experiment system


TABLE III

PERFORMANCE OF THE ROTATIONAL SINS


Parameters Value


Gyro bias repeatability 2.00°/h


Gyro bias stability 0.1°/h

Gyro random walk 0.1°/√h


Gyro scale factor accuracy 100ppm


Accelerator bias repeatability 20.0ug

The performance parameters of the experiment rotation SINS
are shown in TABLE III. The initial alignment experiments
were carried out 5 times, 5 minutes each time, and RMSE was

selected as the evaluation criteria.


_B. Experimental Results_


Fig. 8 Heading error comparison of group 1








7



TABLE IV

H EADING RMSE OF DIFFERENT I NITIAL ALIGNMENT METHODS



Average

heading

RMSE



OBA+K STEKF

OBA
F (group2,3,5)



OBA+KF+


BP



Method in


this paper



Fig. 9 Heading error comparison of group 2


Fig. 10 Heading error comparison of group 3


Fig. 11 Heading error comparison of group 4


Fig. 12 Heading error comparison of group 5


The upper half of Fig. 8 to Fig. 12 is the heading error among
300 seconds, and the bottom half of the figures is the heading
error among 250 to 300 seconds.

From these figures, it can be seen that the OBA method, the
method with BP and the proposed method converged rapidly,
and the detailed comparison on the average RMSE of the five
groups is given in TABLE IV.



50-100 sec 20.622 17.512 54.145 **10.983** 16.888


150-200 sec 4.264 2.820 38.538, 1.869 **1.317**


250-300 sec 1.872 1.840 4.557 1.060 **0.819**


Between 50 and 200 seconds, the accuracy of the OBA
method and the proposed method is better than that of STEKF
and KF, the batch estimation converges faster than the Bayesian
filter. The method with BP also converges very fast by three
times forward KF and backward process to reduce the influence
of prior information.

Between 250 and 300 seconds, by estimating the
misalignment angle and the bias, the heading RMSE of the
proposed method and method with BP is less than that of OBA.
STEKF has the largest heading error, which also proves that the
initial attitude error has a significant influence on the recursive
filter.


Although the RMSE differences between different methods
decreases with the alignment time, between 150 and 300
seconds, the improved method still better than other method in
heading RMSE.

To sum up, there are some conclusions.
1.The initial attitude significantly influences the performance
of the recursive filter. These filters may not converge to the true
value if the prior information have a large error. The proposed
method and the OBA method estimate the initial consist attitude

by MLE, which will not be influenced by prior information and
converge faster if the state has low observability.

2. This method estimates the bias of IMU and misalignment
angle as MAP and which is more accurate than OBA method,
because the OBA don’t consider the IMU bias and

misalignment angle.

3.With the same alignment time, the proposed method is
more accurate than other method with the rapid converge speed
and the multiple optimize on the state of all time steps.


VII. C ONCLUSION


This paper proposed a novel unified initial alignment method
of SINS based on FGO. Firstly, we proposed the error dynamic
model and measurement model of IBF to reduce the nonlinear

property of the system. Then, the corresponding factor graph is
constructed, and finally the initial constant attitude, the
misalignment angle and IMU bias are estimated through FGO.

The FGO can achieve MLE and MAP estimation for

different states on the same time. By batch estimating the
optimal attitude by MLE, estimating the IMU bias and the
misalignment angle by MAP estimation simultaneously, this
unified method successfully combines fast convergence of
MLE and high accuracy of MAP estimator.

With the same initial alignment time, the proposed method is
more accurate than KF and STEKF or the two-procedure initial
alignment method with the rapid converge speed and the


multiple optimize on the state of all time steps. Therefore, by
using this improved method, higher accuracy can be obtained
in a shorter time.


The method can be extended to other state estimation

systems. If the prior information may have large error and the
associate state has low observability, by using FGO, we can
estimate this state by MLE to eliminate the influence of initial
value. Such as lever arm and time drift of GPS/SINS navigation

system.


R EFERENCES


[1] P. M. G. Silson, “Coarse Alignment of a Ship's Strapdown Inertial
Attitude Reference System Using Velocity Loci,” IEEE Transactions
on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1930-1941,
2011.

[2] G. Wahba, “A least squares estimate of satellite attitude,” SIAM Rev.,
vol. 7, no. 3, p. 409, 1965.

[3] L. B. Chang, J. S. Li and K. L. Li, “Optimization-based Alignment
for Strapdown Inertial Navigation System: Comparison and
Extension,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol.52, no. 4, pp. 1697-1713, 2016

[4] Y. Wu, X. Pan, Velocity/Position Integration Formula Part I:
Application to In-flight Coarse Alignment, IEEE Trans. Aerosp.
Electron. Syst., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 1006–1023, Apr. 2013.

[5] J. Li, W. Gao, Y. Zhang and Z. Wang, "Gradient Descent
Optimization-Based Self-Alignment Method for Stationary SINS," in
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 68, no.
9, pp. 3278-3286, Sept. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2018.2878071.

[6] J. C. Fang, and D. J. Wan, “A fast initial alignment method for
strapdown inertial navigation system on stationary base,” IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 32, no. 4,
pp.1501-1505, 1996.

[7] H. J. Shao, L. J. Miao, W. X. Gao and J. Shen, “Ensemble Particle
Filter Based on KLD and Its Application to Initial Alignment of the
SINS in Large Misalignment Angles,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 8946-8955, 2018.

[8] F.O. Silva, E.M. Hemerly and W. C. L. Filho, “On the measurement
selection for stationary SINS alignment Kalman filters,”
Measurement, vol. 130, pp.82-93, 2018.

[9] H. S. Hong, J. G. Lee and C. G. Park, “Performance improvement of
in-flight alignment for autonomous vehicle under large initial heading
error,” IEE Proc.-Radar Sonar Navigation, vol. 151, pp. 57-62, 2004.

[10] T. Qin, P. Li and S. Shen, "VINS-Mono: A Robust and Versatile

Monocular Visual-Inertial State Estimator," in IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1004-1020, Aug. 2018, doi:
10.1109/TRO.2018.2853729.

[11] Wen, W., et al. "It is time for Factor Graph Optimization for

GNSS/INS Integration: Comparison between FGO and EKF." (2020).

[12] Tang, H., et al. "Exploring the Accuracy Potential of IMU

Preintegration in Factor Graph Optimization." (2021).

[13] W. Ding, S. Hou, H. Gao, G. Wan and S. Song, "LiDAR Inertial

Odometry Aided Robust LiDAR Localization System in Changing
City Scenes," 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2020, pp. 4322-4328, doi:
10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196698.

[14] V. Indelman, S. Williams, M. Kaess and F. Dellaert, "Factor graph

based incremental smoothing in inertial navigation systems," 2012
15th International Conference on Information Fusion, 2012, pp. 21542161.

[15] A. Barrau and S. Bonnabel, "The Invariant Extended Kalman Filter

as a Stable Observer," in IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1797-1812, April 2017, doi:
10.1109/TAC.2016.2594085.

[16] M. Wang, W. Wu, X. He and X. Pan, "State Transformation Extended

Kalman Filter for SINS based Integrated Navigation System," 2019
DGON Inertial Sensors and Systems (ISS), 2019, pp. 1-14, doi:
10.1109/ISS46986.2019.8943781.

[17] Chang, L., Qin, F., & Xu, J. . (2021). Strapdown inertial navigation



8


system initial alignment based on group of double direct spatial
isometries.

[18] S. Lü, "Graphical State Space Model," 2021 IEEE International

Conference on Unmanned Systems (ICUS), 2021, pp. 637-643, doi:
10.1109/ICUS52573.2021.9641466.

[19] Barfoot, T. D . . "State estimation for robotics." (2017).

[20] M. Kaess, A. Ranganathan and F. Dellaert, "iSAM: Incremental

Smoothing and Mapping," in IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 24,
no. 6, pp. 1365-1378, Dec. 2008, doi: 10.1109/TRO.2008.2006706.

[21] Frank Dellaert; Michael Kaess, Factor Graphs for Robot Perception,

now, 2017.

[22] B. Liu, S. Wei, J. Lu, J. Wang and G. Su, "Fast Self-Alignment

Technology for Hybrid Inertial Navigation Systems Based on a New
Two-Position Analytic Method," in IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 3226-3235, April 2020, doi:
10.1109/TIE.2019.2910045.

[23] F. O. Silva, E. M. Hemerly, W. C. L. Filho and H. K. Kuga, "A Fast

In-Field Coarse Alignment and Bias Estimation Method for
Stationary Intermediate-Grade IMUs," in IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 831-838, April
2018, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2017.2789138.

[24] C. Shen et al., "Seamless GPS/Inertial Navigation System Based on

Self-Learning Square-Root Cubature Kalman Filter," in IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 499-508, Jan.
2021, doi: 10.1109/TIE.2020.2967671.

[25] Shen, C., Zhang, Y., Tang, J., Cao, H., & Liu, J. . (2019). Dual
optimization for a mems-ins/gps system during gps outages based on
the cubature kalman filter and neural networks. Mechanical Systems
and Signal Processing, 133, 106222.

[26] W. Gao, Y. Ben, X. Zhang, Q. Li and F. Yu, "Rapid Fine Strapdown

INS Alignment Method under Marine Mooring Condition," in IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 47, no. 4, pp.
2887-2896, OCTOBER 2011, doi: 10.1109/TAES.2011.6034671.


